Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you so much. God bless you.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
I am so proud to be an American.
Thank you so much for being here tonight.
Do you love your freedom? If you love your freedom, think of it. Any of you here serving in uniform, past or present, raise your hand? We are going to thank you for our freedom. God bless you guys. We salute you. We honor you. Thank you.
I am so proud to be American. Thank you. Gosh. Thank you. Happy birthday, Ronald Reagan.
Well, a special hello to the C-SPAN viewers. You may not be welcome in those health care negotiations but you have an invitation to the tea party.
Very good to be here in Tennessee, the volunteer state. It's the home of good country music and good southern barbecue, and great to be at the tea party convention. I guess down here that's some southern sweet tea. In Alaska, we have a smaller version of tea party up there. And we call it iced tea.
And I am a big supporter of this movement. I believe in this movement. Got lots of friends and family in the lower 48 attending these events across the country, and just knowing that this is the movement, and America is ready for another revolution, and you are a part of this.
I look forward to attending more tea party events in the near future. It is so inspiring to see real people, not politicos --
-- not inside the beltway professionals come out and stand up and speak out for commonsense, conservative principles.
And today, I want to start off with a special shout out to America's newest Senator. Thanks to you, Scott Brown.
Now in many ways Scott Brown represents what this beautiful movement is all about. He was just a guy with a truck and a passion to serve our country. He looked around and he saw that things weren't quite right in Washington, so he stood up and he decided he was going do his part to put our government back on the side of the people. And it took guts and it took a lot of hard work, but with grassroots support, Scott Brown carried the day. It has been so interesting now to watch the aftermath of the Massachusetts shout-out revolution.
The White House blames the candidate. Their candidate. And Nancy Pelosi, she blamed the Senate Democrats. And Rahm Emanuel, he criticized a pollster.
And yet again, President Obama found some way to make this all about George Bush.
You know considering the reason conservative elections sweep, it is time to stop that they blaming everyone else. When you are zero for three, you better stop lecturing and start listening.
The only place that the left hasn't placed the blame is on their agenda. So some advice for our friends on that side of the aisle. That's where you've got to look because that's what got you into this mess. The Obama/Pelosi/Reid agenda will leave us less secure, more in debt and under the thumb of big government. That is out of touch and is out of date. And if Scott Brown is any indication, it is running out of time.
Because from Virginia to New Jersey to Massachusetts, voters are sending a message up and down the east coast, and in good places like Nevada and Connecticut and Colorado, Michigan, North Dakota, they've got the liberal left, that establishment running scared.
The bottom line is this. It's been a year now. They own this now. and voters are going to hold them accountable. Because out here in the cities and in the towns across this great country we know that we've got some big problems to solve. We've gotten tired now of looking backward. We want to look forward and, from here, my friends, the future, it looks really good. It looks really good. Because if there is hope in Massachusetts, there's hope everywhere.
Brown's victory, it's exciting and it's a sign of more good things to come. A lot of great common-sense conservative candidates are going to put it all on the line in 2010. This year, there are going to be tough primaries. And I think that's good. Competition in these primaries is good. Competition makes us work harder and be more efficient and produce more. I hope you will get out there and work hard for the candidates who reflect your values, your priorities, because despite what the pundits want you to think, contested primaries aren't civil war. They're democracy at work and that's beautiful.
I was the product of a competitive primary running for governor. I faced five guys in the party and we put our ideas and our experience out there on the table for debate. And then we allowed, of course, the voters to decide. That is a healthy process. And it gives Americans the kind of leadership that they want and they deserve. And so in 2010, I tip my hat to anyone with the courage to throw theirs in the ring and may the best ideas and candidates win.
But while I hope you give the candidates that you choose your best effort, please understand they're human. There's no perfect candidate. And they're going to disappoint occasionally. And when they do, let them know, but don't get discouraged and sit it out, because the stakes are too high. The stakes are too high right now, and your voice is too important, so work hard for these candidates but put your faith in ideas.
And in that spirit, I caution against allowing this movement to be defined by any one leader or politician. The tea party movement is not a top-down operation. It's a ground-up call to action that is forcing both parties to change the way they're doing business, and that's beautiful.
This is about the people. This is about the people. And it's bigger than any king or queen of a tea party. And it's a lot bigger than any charismatic guy with a teleprompter.
The soul of this movement is the people, everyday Americans, who grow our food and run our small businesses, who teach our kids and fight our wars. They're folks in small towns and cities across this great nation who saw what was happening and they saw and were concerned and they got involved. Like you, they go to town hall meetings and they write op-eds. They run for local office. You all have the courage to stand up and speak out. You have a vision for the future, one that values conservative principles and commonsense solutions. And if that sounds like you, then you probably, too, are feeling a bit discouraged by what you see in Washington, D.C.
Now in recent weeks, many of us have grown even more uneasy about our administration's approach to national security, the most important role ascribed to our federal government.
Let me say, too, it's not politicizing our security to discuss our concerns because Americans deserve to know the truth about the threats that we face and what the administration is or isn't doing about them. So let's talk about them. New terms used like "overseas contingency operation" instead of the word "war." That reflects a world view that is out of touch with the enemy that we face. We can't spin our way out of this threat. It is one thing to call a pay raise a job created or saved. It is quite another to call the devastation that a homicide bomber can inflict a "manmade disaster." I just say, come on, Washington, if no where else, national security, that is one place where you've got to call it like it is.
And in that spirit, in that spirit, we should acknowledge that, on Christmas day, the system did not work. Abdulmutallab passed through airport security with a bomb. and he boarded a flight hell bent on killing innocent passengers. This terrorist trained in Yemen with al Qaeda. His American visa was not revoked until after he tried to kill hundreds of passengers. On Christmas day, the only thing that stopped this terrorist is blind luck and brave passengers. It was a Christmas miracle. And that is not the way that the system is supposed to work.
What followed was equally disturbing after he was captured. He was questioned for only 50 minutes. We have a choice in how to do this. The choice was only question him for 50 minutes and then read his Miranda rights. The administration says then there are no downsides or upsides to treating terrorists like civilian criminal defendants. But a lot of us would beg to differ. For example, there are questions we would have liked this foreign terrorist to answer before he lawyered up and invoked our U.S. constitutional right to remain silent.
Our U.S. constitutional rights.
Our rights that you, sir, fought and were willing to die for to protect in our Constitution.
The rights that my son, as an infantryman in the United States Army, is willing to die for. The protections provided, thanks to you, sir, we're going to bestow them on a terrorist who hates our Constitution and tries to destroy our Constitution and our country. This makes no sense because we have a choice in how we're going to deal with the terrorists. We don't have to go down that road. There are questions that we would have liked answered before he lawyered up, like where exactly were you trained and by whom. You are bragging about all these other terrorists just like you, who are they? When and where will they try to strike next?
The events surrounding the Christmas day plot reflect the kind of thinking that led to September 11th. The threat then, as the "USS Cole" was attacked, our embassies were attacked, it was treated like an international crime spree not like an act of war. We are seeing that mindset again settle into Washington again. That scares me for my children, for your children. Treating this as a mere law enforcement matter places our country at great risks because that is not how radical Islamic extremists look at this. They know we are at war. To win that war, we need a commander in chief, not a professor of law standing at the lectern.
It's that same kind of misguided thinking that is seen throughout the administration's foreign policy decisions. Our president spent a year reaching out to hostile regimes, writing personal letters to dangerous dictators and apologizing for America, and what do we have to show for that? Here's what we have to show. North Korea tested nuclear weapons and longer-range ballistic missiles. Israel, a friend and critical ally, now questions the strength of our support. Plans for a missile defense system in Europe, they've been scrapped. Relations with China and Russia are no better. and relations with Japan, that key Asian ally, they are in the worst shape in years. And around the world, people who are seeking freedom from oppressive regimes wonder if Alaska is still that beacon of hope for their cause. The administration cut support for democracy programs. And where the president has not been clear, I ask where is his clear and where his strong voice of support for the Iranians who are risking all in their opposition to Ahmadinejad?
Just that short list, that short list. And you know, it is no wonder that our president only spent 9 percent of his State of the Union address discussing national security, foreign policy, because there aren't a lot of victories he could talk about that night. And that is a short list. There are so many challenges in front of us. And it can seem overwhelming. But despite these challenges, we have hope that we can move things in the right direction but it is going to require the administration to change course. We need a foreign policy that distinguishes America's friends from her enemies and recognizes the true nature of the threats that we face.
We need a strong national defense. I think you would agree with me. As Reagan used to talk about that peace through strength. In that respect, I applaud the president for following at least a part of the recommendations made by our commanders on the ground to send in some more reinforcements to Afghanistan. Now, though, he, we, must spend less time courting our adversaries and working with our allies. And we must build coalitions capable of confronting dangerous regimes like Iran and North Korea. It is time for more than just tough talk. I'm just like you, probably so tired of hearing the talk, talk, talk.
Tired of hearing the talk.
It's time for some tough actions, like sanctions on Iran. And in places in the world where people are struggling and oppressed and they're fighting for freedom, America must stand with them. We need a clear foreign policy that stands with the people and for democracy, one that reflects both our values and our interests. And it is in our best interest because democracies, they don't go to war with each other. They can settle their differences peacefully.
The lesson of the last year is this. Foreign policy can't be managed through the politics of personality. And our president would do well to take note of an observation John F. Kennedy made once he was in office, that all of the world's problems aren't his predecessor's fault.
The problems that we face in the real world require real solutions and we'd better get to it because the risks that they pose are great and they're grave. However, as Barry Goldwater said, we can be conquered by bombs, but we can also be conquered by neglect, by ignoring our Constitution and disregarding the principles of limited government. And in the past year, his words ring true. Washington has now replaced private irresponsibility with public irresponsibility. The list of companies and industries that the government is crowding out and bailing out and taking over, it continues to grow. First, it was the banks, mortgage companies, financial institutions, then automakers. Soon, if they had their way, health care, student loans. Today, in the words of Congressman Paul Ryan, the $700 billion TARP has morphed into crony capitalism at its worse. It is becoming a slush fund for the Treasury Department's favorite big players, just as we had been warned about. While people on main street look for jobs, people on Wall Street, they're collecting billions and billions in your bailout bonuses. Among the top 17 companies that received your bailout money, 92 percent of the senior officers and directors, they still have their good jobs. And everyday Americans are wondering, where are the consequences for them helping to get us into this worst economic situation since the great depression? Where are the consequences?
When Washington passed a $787 billion stimulus bill, we were nervous because they just spent $700 billion to bailout Wall Street. On the state level, as a governor, we knew a lot of that money came with fat strings attached. The federal government was going to have more control over our states. They were going to disrespect the Tenth Amendment of our Constitution by essentially bribing with us. Take this federal money and then we going to be able to mandate a few more things on you though. I joined with other conservative governors around the nation in rejecting some of those dollars. Legislators --
Turned out to be, though, nothing to applaud, because legislators then were threatening lawsuits if governors didn't take the money. And I vetoed some of the funds that I knew we couldn't maintain the programs that we were going to pay for with these borrowed, printed up, invented dollars out of nowhere, but lawsuits were threatened. Even in Alaska, in a Republican-controlled legislature, my veto was overridden, and the money poured into those states. And I believe we will see this play out in our states. The federal government will have taken more control over the people who live in our states.
Now I understand wanting to believe that this is all free money and for some, I guess, it is tough to tell people "no" in tough times. Plus, remember our administration promise that it would be good stewards of taxpayer dollars. Remember? Remember, Vice President Biden? He was put in charge of a tough, unprecedented oversight effort. That's how it was introduced. You know why? Because nobody messes with Joe.
Now, this was all part of that hope and change and transparency. And now a year later, I got to ask the supporters of all that, how is that hopey-changey stuff working out for you?
See, I tried to look into that transparency thing but Joe's meetings with the transparency and accountability board, it was closed to the public.
Yes. They held a transparency meeting behind closed doors.
So I'm not sure if anybody's messing with Joe. But here is what I do know. A lot of that stimulus cash, it ended up in some pretty odd places, including districts that didn't even exist.
And programs that really don't have a whole lot to do with stimulating the economy. Nearly $6 million was given to a Democrat pollster, who had already made millions during the Democrats' presidential primary. Nearly $10 million was spent to update the stimulus web site. And one state even spent a million bucks to put up signs that advertised they were spending the federal stimulus projects or, as someone put it, this was a $1 million effort to tell you it is spending your money.
And it didn't create a single job.
Those uses of stimulus funds don't sound targeted and they don't sound timely as we were promised. They just sound wasteful and, in the case of those signs, kind of ridiculous. All of that stimulus. I don't know about you but seeing those checks written for pet projects of congressmen and those in the White House, did you feel very stimulated?
And then it turns out that Washington got the price tag wrong. All of these projects and programs, they cost tens and tens of billions more than we were told. It is now closer to $860 billion. Add this to the fact that the White House can't even tell us how many jobs were actually created. Depending on who you ask, it is anywhere from thousands to two million.
But one number we are sure of is the unemployment number. That is 9.7, which is well above the 8 percent mark that we were promised our stimulus package would go to avoid. And unemployment now is -- underemployment now is 16.5 percent. You have got all these people who have just kind of given up right now. and they are not even enrolling in some of these programs. Tough to count them.
Folks, I won't go into all of it tonight, but the list of broken promises is long. Candidate Obama pledged to end closed-door, sweetheart deals and no-bit contracts once and for all, but just last month his administration awarded a $25 million no-bid contract to a Democrat donor? Is that hope? Nope. It's not hope.
That's the same old, same old in Washington, D.C. And instead of changing the way Washington does business, we got the cornhusker kickback and the Louisiana Purchase and millions of tax breaks for union boss' desires. The promised ban on lobbyist in this new administration, he handed out waivers left and right, and there are more than 40 former lobbyists who now work at the top levels in this administration. And these days, most members of Congress, they don't get to read the bill before they have to vote on it, much less the pledged that a bill wouldn't be signed into law before we all had five days to review it online.
So, see, it's easy to understand why Americans are shaking their heads when Washington has broken trust with the people that these politicians are to be serving. We're drowning in national debt and many of us have had enough. Now the foundational principles in all of this, it's easy to understand. It really is even I though I think D.C. would just love for us to believe that this is all way over our heads. Somebody in Tennessee, somebody up there in Alaska, she'll never understand what we are talking about here in D.C. No, this is all pretty simple stuff. When our families, when our small businesses, we start running our finances in to the red, what do we do? We tighten our belts and we cut back budgets. That is what we teach our children, to live within our means. That is what Todd and I do when we have to make payroll, buy new equipment for our commercial fishing business. We have to plan for the future, meet a budget.
But in Washington, why is it just the opposite of that? This week, they unveiled a record busting, mind boggling $3.8 trillion federal budget and they keep borrowing and they keep printing these dollars and they keep making us more and more beholden to foreign countries and they keep making us take these steps towards insolvency. Now what they are doing in proposing these big new programs with giant price tags, they're sticking our kids with the bill. And that is immoral. That is generational theft. We are stealing the opportunities from our children.
And freedom lovers around this country need to be aware this makes us more beholden to other countries, it makes us less secure. It makes us less free and that should tick us off. So, folks, with all these serious challenges ahead, we've got private-sector job creation that has got to take place and economic woes and health care, the war on terror.
But as the saying goes, if you can't ride two horses at once, you shouldn't be in the circus. So here's some advice for those in D.C. who want to shine in the greatest show on earth. Too often when big government and big business get together and cronyism sets in, well, it benefits insiders not everyday Americans. The administration and Congress should do what we did up there in Alaska when the good old boys started making back room deals that were benefiting big oil and not the citizens of the state. And the citizens of the state then, Alaskans, we got together and we put government back on the side of the people. And a lot of the big wigs, they started getting in trouble and some of the big wigs ended up going to jail over their back room deals.
Our government needs to adopt a pro-market agenda that doesn't pick winners and losers but it invites competition and it levels the playing field for everyone. Washington has got to across the board, lower taxes for small businesses so that our mom and pops can reinvest and hire people so that our businesses can thrive. They should support competition, support innovation, reward hard work.
And they should do all that they can to make sure that the game is fair without the undo corrupt influence. And then they need to get government out of the way. If they would do this -- if they would do this, our economy, it would roar back to life and for instance on health care, we need bipartisan solutions to help families not increase taxes. Remember that red reset button that America through Secretary Clinton, she gave to Putin. Remember that? I think we should ask for that back and hand it instead to Congress. And say, no, start all over on this health care scheme and pass meaningful, market-based reforms that incorporate some simple steps that have broad support. The best ideas, not back room deals but insurance purchases across state lines and the tort reform that we've talked about.
Those things that are common sense steps towards reform that the White House and leaders on the Democrats' side of the aisle in Congress, they don't want to consider. So it makes you wonder, what truly is their motivation? What is their intention if they won't consider even these common sense, broad based support ideas that would work? And to create jobs. Washington should jump start energy projects. I said it during the campaign and I'll say it now, we need an all of the above approach to energy policy. That means proven conventional resource development and support for nuclear power. And I was thankful that the president at least mentioned nuclear power in his State of the Union.
But, again, we need more than words. We need a plan to turn that goal into a reality and that way we can pave the way for projects that will create jobs, those are real job creators and deliver carbon free energy. And while we're at it, let's expedite the regulatory and permitting and legal processes for on and offshore drilling.
Instead of paying billions of dollars, hundreds of billions of dollars that now are being sent to foreign regimes, we should be drilling here and drilling now instead of relying on them to develop their resources for us. So what we've got to do is axe that plan for cap-and-tax, that policy is going to kill jobs and it's going to pass the burden of paying for it onto our working families.
And finally, if we are going to get serious about fiscal restraint, then we've got to make Washington start walking the walk. After putting us on a track to quadruple the deficit, the proposed spending freeze, maybe it is a start, but it's certainly not enough. As Senator John Thune said, it's like putting a Band-Aid on a self- inflicted gunshot wound.
We need to go further. Cut spending. Don't just simply slow down a spending spree and we've got to axe the plans for a second stimulus when the first hasn't even been measured for any success yet. Kill the plans for the second stimulus and be aware that now that second stimulus is being referred to as a jobs bill. Now these aren't the only ways to rein in spending, and alone, they're not going to be enough, not enough to tackle the insane debt and the deficits that we face. But they are a good way to start and to show that we're serious about getting our financial house in order.
Now like a lot of you, perhaps, I have spent the last year thinking about how to best serve. How can I help our country? How can I make sure that I, that you, that we're in a position of nobody being able to succeed. When they try to tell us to sit down and shut up, how can we best serve? In 2008, I had the honor really of a lifetime, the honor of a lifetime, running alongside John McCain. I look at him as an American hero. And nearly 60 million Americans voted for us. They cast their ballot for the things that we are talking about tonight. Lower taxes, smaller government, transparency, energy independence and strong national security. And while no, our votes did not carry the day, it was still a call to serve our country. Those voters wanted us to keep on fighting and take the gloves off and they wanted common sense conservative solutions and they wanted us to keep on debating. And each of us who is here today, we're living proof that you don't need an office or a title to make a difference and you don't need a proclaimed leader as if we are all just a bunch of sheep and we're looking for a leader to progress this movement.
That is what we are fighting for. It is what we are fighting about. It is what we believe in and that's what this movement is all about. When people are willing to meet halfway and stand up for common sense solutions and values, then we want to work with them. And in that spirit, I applaud Independents and Democrats like Bart Stupak who stood up to tough partisan pressure and he wanted to protect the sanctity of life and the rights of the soon to be born. I applaud him for that.
When we can work together, we will. But when the work of Washington violates our consciences and when the work and effort in Washington, D.C., violate our Constitution, then we will stand up and we will be counted. Because we are the loyal opposition. And we have a vision for the future of our country, too, and it is a vision anchored in time tested truths.
That the government that governs least, governs best. And that the Constitution provides the best road map towards a more perfect union. And that only limited government can expand prosperity and opportunity for all and that freedom is a God given right and it is worth fighting for. God bless you. And that America's finest, our men and women in uniform, are a force for good throughout the world and that is nothing to apologize for.
These are enduring truths and these enduring truths have been passed down from Washington to Lincoln to Reagan and now to you. But while this movement, our roots there, in our spirit, too, they are historic. The current form of this movement is fresh and it's young and it's fragile. We are now the keepers of an honorable tradition of conservative values and good works. And we must never forget that it is a sacred trust to carry these ideas forward. It demands civility and it requires decent constructive issue-oriented debate.
Opponents of this message, they are seeking to marginalize this movement. They want to paint us as ideologically extreme and the counterpoint to liberal intolerance and outrageous conspiracy theorists aimed at our own government and unethical shameless tactics like considering a candidate's children fair game.
But unlike the elitists who denounce this movement, they just don't want to hear the message. I've traveled across this great country and I've talked to the patriotic men and women who make up the Tea Party movement, and they are good and kind and selfless and they are deeply concerned about our country. And today I ask only this, let's make this movement a tribute to their good example and make it worthy of their hard work and their support.
Do not let us have our heads turned from the important work before us and do not give others an excuse to be able to turn their eyes from this. Let us not get bogged down in the small squabbles. Let us get caught up in the big ideas. To do so would be a fitting tribute to Ronald Reagan, especially tonight, as he would have turned 99. No longer with us. His spirit lives on and his American dream endures. He knew the best of our country is not all gathered in Washington, D.C. It is here in our communities where families live and children learn and children with special needs are welcomed in this world and embraced. And thank you for that.
The best of America can be found in places where patriots are brave enough and free enough to be able to stand up and speak up and where small businesses grow our economy one job at a time and folks like Reagan, we know that America is still that shining city on a hill. I do believe that God shed his grace on thee. We know that our best days are yet to come. Tea Party nation, we know that there is nothing wrong with America that together we can't fix as Americans.
So from the bottom of my heart and speaking on behalf of millions and millions and millions of Americans who want to encourage this movement, this movement is about the people. Who can argue of a movement that is about the people and for the people? Remember, all political power is inherent in the people and government is supposed to be working for the people. That is what this movement is about.
From the bottom of my heart, I thank you for being part of the solution. God bless you, Tea Partiers and God bless the USA. Thank you. God bless you.
But there you see Sarah Palin there on the stage, Opryland Hotel, Gaylord Opryland Hotel. And she again talked about the administration, talked about the current administration, I should say, talked about what the Tea Party movement is all about, getting thunderous applause especially towards the end. It appears that she may have gotten a little teary eyed when talking about her special needs child saying that she likes to be part of a group that welcomes a special needs child into the world, welcomes and accepts. Sarah Palin taking questions now.
We are going to go back there live and listen in.
Thank you.
It is. I haven't even been here for a concert yet which Piper, I brought Piper with me, and she's just going crazy wanting to get out there and see if she can go out and find Miley Cyrus and Taylor Swift. My first time here though.
The Republican Party would be really smart to start trying to absorb as much of the Tea Party movement as possible because this is the future of our country. The Tea Party movement is the future of politics and as I said before, this is a beautiful movement because it is shaping the way politics are conducted. You've got really both party machines running scared because they are not knowing what are we going to do if we don't have Tea Party support? They know that they won't succeed.
I'm going to ask them if they think that we're taxed enough already. And if they say yes, I'm going to say well what are you going to do about it. Because really, we don't want to just hear the talk. We want to know that they walk the walk, either via a record that perhaps they can prove to us in other elected office they have had. But I want to encourage people who don't have any elected office experience, not some kind of fat elite resume in their back pocket. I want the fresh folks to come out and run for office and start changing the world via these state and local and national offices.
But if they feel that they've been taxed enough already and that they make us a commitment that they are going to do something about it and if they just believe in that constitutional limited government that the federal government has got to start abiding by, a lot of the things that perhaps the details, the things on the periphery that perhaps I wouldn't agree with very single aspect of their agenda that they would like to implement, they have got the basics down, I think it would be wise for us to be supportive.
We will.
We've got to rein in the spending, obviously, and not raise it extremely high budgets and then say, OK, we are going to freeze a couple programs here. That doesn't do us any good really. We've got to start reining in the spending. We have got to jump start these energy projects that, again, we have heard so much about because it is ridiculous that we have just sitting warehoused under God's green earth here in the United States of America, rich resources, oil, and gas, and our coil and all of the conventional resources. We have got to actually walk that walk, to allow them to come to development.
And then, I think, it is kind of tougher to -- kind of tougher to put our arms around, but allowing America's spirit to rise again by not being afraid -- not being afraid to kind of go back to some of our roots as a God-fearing nation where we are not afraid to say, especially in times of potential trouble in the future here, we are not afraid to say, you know, we don't have all the answers as fallible men and women.
So it would be wise of us to start seeking some divine intervention again in this country so that we can be safe and secure and prosperous again. To have people involved in government who aren't afraid to go that route, not so afraid of the political correctness that, you know, they have to be afraid of what the media would say about them if they were to proclaim their reliance on our creator.
Plow right on through it. Really, at the end of the day, who cares what an irrelevant, mainstream media is going to say about you? Who cares? The political hot shots that they want to take at you for standing up and saying what you believe in and proclaiming the patriotic love that you have for country and a lot of those in the mainstream media, they don't want to hear that. At the end of the day, it really doesn't matter what they have to say about you because I really believe that there are more of us than they want us to believe. That should empower us, that should strengthen us and plow right on through it, please. 
Hey, they are already peeking in. It is pretty cool to see some of the blue dog Democrats peeking under the tent, you know, and finding out, what is this movement all about and holy geez, I'm scared if I'm not a part of this.
And the nice thing about the Tea Party movement, it's not just a bunch of hard core registered Republicans. I'll make a confession right now. My husband, he's not a registered Republican. He's much too independent, but probably more conservative than I am, even, but I think he is kind of an example of so many other American who don't choose to be a part of a registered party because they see the problems within the machine.
They see some of the idiosyncrasies of the personalities who control the political machines and they don't want to waste time dealing with that, so they are independent, but they are believers in the movement and I think you're going to see a whole lot of the Independents and more conservative Democrats finally be empowered and emboldened and say, yes, I'll come out of the closet now and I'll let them know I believe in it too.
Now, as I talk about Todd explaining that he's not a registered Republican, I guess I need to apologize to the Republican Party because some people have said, you're a pretty weak Republican spokesperson that if you can't even get your own husband to convert, but he's much too independent.
The Palin plan is quite simple and I kind of get a kick out of it. I think it probably drives some of the elitists crazy that I don't get angry out about it, I get a kick out of it when they say that I'm too simple minded and too plain spoken, but my plan is quite simple and that is to support those who understand the foundation of our country.
When it comes to the economy, it is free market principles that reward hard work and personal responsibility. And when it comes to national security, as I ratchet down the message on national security, it's easy to just kind of sum it up by repeating Ronald Reagan when he talked about the Cold War. And we can apply this now to our war on terrorism, you know. Bottom line, we win, they lose. We do all that we can to win.
He's doing awesome. And I'm so proud of him and the decision that he has made along with all the many, many men and women in uniform who -- I look at, especially these young men and women and think, they could be doing anything or nothing else in our world, and they have chosen to serve something greater than self. They are not just biting time or wasting time in their young years of their lives. They get it. They understand the need to protect our security and to really be willing to die for our freedom. And when I talk about my son, and he doesn't like me to talk about him, as a matter of fact, he'll chew me out if he hears about this, but --
I don't think he's ever turned on C-SPAN in his entire young life. But I'm proud of him and the decision that he has made because, again, they are serving something greater than self, but as Track, as my son would tell me, he says, don't pick me up, mom to thank me. Thank the troops I serve with and thank those who have gone on before me to allow me to do what I'm doing, yeah.
I will. And I will be attending as many events for these candidates as possible. I'll probably tick off some people as I get involved, even in a few of the primaries, but I do want to encourage these contested competitive primaries. Truly, this is how we are going to find the cream of the crop to rise to be able to face a challenger in the general. Let's not be afraid of contested primaries. I'm going to assist in some of those, but I'll get out there and campaign and if not in all the races, campaigning for specific candidates, I'm going to be campaigning for the message, this common sense conservative message.

Thank you so much. It’s so great to be here in Iowa. We’re here just thawing out. Todd and I and a couple of our friends here from Alaska, lending our support for the next president of our great United States of America, Donald J. Trump.

Mr. Trump, you’re right, look back there in the press box. Heads are spinning, media heads are spinning. This is going to be so much fun.

Are you ready to make America great again? We all have a part in this. We all have a responsibility. Looking around at all of you, you hardworking Iowa families. You farm families, and teachers, and teamsters, and cops, and cooks. You rockin’ rollers. And holy rollers! All of you who work so hard. You full-time moms. You with the hands that rock the cradle. You all make the world go round, and now our cause is one.

When asked why I would jump into a primary — kind of stirring it up a little bit maybe — and choose one over some friends who are running and I’ve endorsed a couple others in their races before they decided to run for president, I was told left and right, “You are going to get so clobbered in the press. You are just going to get beat up, and chewed up, and spit out.” You know, I’m thinking, And? You know, like you guys haven’t tried to do that every day since that night in ‘08, when I was on stage nominated for VP, and I got to say, “yeah, I’ll go, send me, you betcha. I’ll serve.” And, like you all, I’m still standing. So those of us who’ve kind of gone through the wringer as Mr. Trump has, makes me respect you even more. That you’re here, and you’re putting your efforts, you’re putting reputations, you’re putting relationships on the line to do the right thing for this country. Because you are ready to make America great again.

Well, I am here because like you I know that it is now or never. I’m in it to win it because we believe in America, and we love our freedom. And if you love your freedom, thank a vet. Thank a vet, and know that the United States military deserves a commander-in-chief that our country passionately, and will never apologize for this country. A new commander-in-chief who will never leave our men behind. A new commander-in-chief, one who will never lie to the families of the fallen. I’m in it, because just last week, we’re watching our sailors suffer and be humiliated on a world stage at the hands of Iranian captors in violation of international law, because a weak-kneed, capitulator-in-chief has decided America will lead from behind. And he, who would negotiate deals, kind of with the skills of a community organizer maybe organizing a neighborhood tea, well, he deciding that, “No, America would apologize as part of the deal,” as the enemy sends a message to the rest of the world that they capture and we kowtow, and we apologize, and then, we bend over and say, “Thank you, enemy.” We are ready for a change. We are ready and our troops deserve the best. A new commander-in-chief whose track record of success has proven he is the master at the art of the deal. He is one who would know to negotiate.

Only one candidate’s record of success proves he is the master of the art of the deal. He is beholden to no one but we the people, how refreshing. He is perfectly positioned to let you make America great again. Are you ready for that, Iowa?

No more pussy footin’ around! Our troops deserve the best, you deserve the best!

He is from the private sector, not a politician, can I get a “Hallelujah!” Where, in the private sector, you actually have to balance budgets in order to prioritize, to keep the main thing, the main thing, and he knows the main thing: a president is to keep us safe economically and militarily. He knows the main thing, and he knows how to lead the charge. So troops, hang in there, because help’s on the way because he, better than anyone, isn’t he known for being able to command, fire! Are you ready for a commander-in-chief, you ready for a commander-in-chief who will let our warriors do their job and go kick ISIS ass? Ready for someone who will secure our borders, to secure our jobs, and to secure our homes? Ready to make America great again, are you ready to stump for Trump? I’m here to support the next president of the United States, Donald Trump.

Now, eight years ago, I warned that Obama’s promised fundamental transformation of America. That is was going to take more from you, and leave America weaker on the world stage. And that we would soon be unrecognizable. Well, it’s the one promise that Obama kept. But he didn’t do it alone, and this is important to remember, especially those of you, like me, a member of the GOP, this is what we have to remember, in this very contested, competitive, great primary race.

Trump’s candidacy, it has exposed not just that tragic ramifications of that betrayal of the transformation of our country, but too, he has exposed the complicity on both sides of the aisle that has enabled it, okay? Well, Trump, what he’s been able to do, which is really ticking people off, which I’m glad about, he’s going rogue left and right, man, that’s why he’s doing so well. He’s been able to tear the veil off this idea of the system. The way that the system really works, and please hear me on this, I want you guys to understand more and more how the system, the establishment, works, and has gotten us into the troubles that we are in in America. The permanent political class has been doing the bidding of their campaign donor class, and that’s why you see that the borders are kept open. For them, for their cheap labor that they want to come in. That’s why they’ve been bloating budgets. It’s for crony capitalists to be able suck off of them. It’s why we see these lousy trade deals that gut our industry for special interests elsewhere. We need someone new, who has the power, and is in the position to bust up that establishment to make things great again. It’s part of the problem.

His candidacy, which is a movement, it’s a force, it’s a strategy. It proves, as long as the politicos, they get to keep their titles, and their perks, and their media ratings, they don’t really care who wins elections. Believe me on this. And the proof of this? Look what’s happening today. Our own GOP machine, the establishment, they who would assemble the political landscape, they’re attacking their own frontrunner. Now would the Left ever, would the DNC ever come after their frontrunner and her supporters? No because they don’t eat their own, they don’t self-destruct. But for the GOP establishment to be coming after Donald Trump’s supporters even, with accusations that are so false. They are so busted, the way that this thing works.

We, you, a diverse, dynamic, needed support base that they would attack. And now, some of them even whispering, they’re ready to throw in for Hillary over Trump because they can’t afford to see the status quo go, otherwise, they won’t be able to be slurping off the gravy train that’s been feeding them all these years. They don’t want that to end.

Well, and then, funny, ha ha, not funny, but now, what they’re doing is wailing, “well, Trump and his, uh, uh, uh, Trumpeters, they’re not conservative enough.” Oh my goodness gracious. What the heck would the establishment know about conservatism? Tell me, is this conservative? GOP majorities handing over a blank check to fund Obamacare and Planned Parenthood and illegal immigration that competes for your jobs, and turning safety nets into hammocks, and all these new Democrat voters that are going to be coming on over border as we keep the borders open, and bequeathing our children millions in new debt, and refusing to fight back for our solvency, and our sovereignty, even though that’s why we elected them and sent them as a majority to DC. No! If they’re not willing to do that, then how are they to tell us that we’re not conservative enough in order to be able to make these changes in America that we know need to be…Now they’re concerned about this ideological purity? Give me a break! Who are they to say that? Oh tell somebody like, Phyllis Schlafly, she is the Republican, conservative movement icon and hero and a Trump supporter. Tell her she’s not conservative. How ‘bout the rest of us? Right wingin’, bitter clingin’, proud clingers of our guns, our god, and our religions, and our Constitution. Tell us that we’re not red enough? Yeah, coming from the establishment. Right.

Well, he being the only one who’s been willing, he’s got the guts to wear the issues that need to be spoken about and debate on his sleeve, where the rest of some of these establishment candidates, they just wanted to duck and hide. They didn’t want to talk about these issue until he brought ‘em up. In fact, they’ve been wearing a, this, political correctness kind of like a suicide vest. And enough is enough. These issues that Donald Trump talks about had to be debated. And he brought them to the forefront. And that’s why we are where we are today with good discussion. A good, heated, and very competitive primary is where we are. And now though, to be lectured that, “Well, you guys are all sounding kind of angry,” is what we’re hearing from the establishment. Doggone right we’re angry! Justifiably so! Yes! You know, they stomp on our neck, and then they tell us, “Just chill, okay just relax.” Well, look, we are mad, and we’ve been had. They need to get used to it.

This election is more than just your basic ABCs, anybody but Clinton. It’s more than that this go-around. When we’re talking about a nation without borders. When we’re talking about bankruptcies in our federal government. Debt that our children and our grandchildren, they’ll never be able to pay off. When we’re talking about no more Reaganesque power that comes from strength. Power through strength. Well, then, we’re talking about our very existence, so no, we’re not going to chill. In fact it’s time to drill, baby, drill down, and hold these folks accountable. And we need to stop the self-sabotage and elect new, and independent, a candidate who represents that and represents America first, finally. Pro-Constitution, common-sense solutions, that he brings to the table. Yes the status quo has got to go. Otherwise we’re just going to get more of the same, and with their failed agenda, it can’t be salvaged. It must be savaged. And Donald Trump is the right one to do that.

Are you ready for new? And are you ready for the leader who will let you make America great again? It’s gonna take a whole team. It’s gonna take a whole team. Fighters, all of us, in the private sector. Fighters in the House and the Senate. So, our friends, who are fighters in the House and the Senate today, they need to stay there and help out. They can help our new leader in the positions that they are in.

Let me say something really positive about one of those individuals: Rand Paul. I’m going to tell you about that libertarian streak in him that is healthy, because he knows, you only go to war if you’re determined to win the war! And you quit footin’ the bill for these nations who are oil-rich, we’re paying for some of their squirmishes that have been going on for centuries. Where they’re fightin’ each other and yellin’ “Allah Akbar” calling Jihad on each other’s heads for ever and ever. Like I’ve said before, let them duke it out and let Allah sort it out. We’ll fight for American interests, and as Donald Trump has said, other nations where we have been footin’ the bill, but we haven’t prioritized our own domestic budgets well enough to be able to afford what we’re doing overseas. Things are gonna change under President Trump.

So it can be an unbeatable team with fighters there in the House and the Senate. Yeah, our leader is a little bit different. He’s a multi-billionaire. Not that there’s anything wrong with that. But, it’s amazing, he is not elitist at all. Oh, I just hope you all get to know him more and more as a person, and a family man. What he’s been able to accomplish, with his um, it’s kind of this quiet generosity. Yeah, maybe his largess kind of, I don’t know, some would say gets in the way of that quiet generosity, and, uh, his compassion, but if you know him as a person and you’ll get to know him more and more, you’ll have even more respect. Not just for his record of success, and the good intentions for America, but who he is as a person. He’s not an elitist. And yes, as a multi-billionaire, we still root him on, because he roots us on. And he has, he’s spent his life with the workin’ man. And he tells us Joe six packs, he said, “You know, I’ve worked very, very hard. And I’ve succeeded. Hugely I’ve succeeded,” he says. And he says, “I want you to succeed too.” And that is refreshing, because he, as he builds things, he builds big things, things that touch the sky, big infrastructure that puts other people to work. He has spent his life looking up and respecting the hard-hats and the steel-toed boots and the work ethic that you all have within you. He, being an optimist, passionate about equal-opportunity to work. The self-made success of his, you know that he doesn’t get his power, his high, off of OPM, other people’s money, like a lot of dopes in Washington do. They’re addicted to OPM, where they take other people’s money, and then their high is getting to redistribute it, right? And then they get to be really popular people when they get to give out your hard money. Well, he doesn’t do that. His power, his passion, is the fabric of America. And it’s woven by work ethic and dreams and drive and faith in the Almighty, what a combination.

Are you ready to share in that again, Iowa? Because that’s what’s going to let you make America great again. He’s going to be able to empower you to look out for one-another again instead of relying on a bankrupt government to supposedly be looking out for you. No, and I think you’re ready for that. And Iowa, I believe too that you’re ready to see that our vets are treated better than illegal immigrants are treated in this country. And you’re ready for the tax reform he talks about to open up main street again. And you’re ready to stop the race-baiting and the division based on color and zip code, to unify around the right issues. The issues important to me, or I wouldn’t be endorsing him. Pro-life, pro-Second Amendment, strict constitutionality. Those things that are unifying values and their time-tested truths involved. These are unifying values from big cities and tiny towns, from big mountain states and the Big Apple, to the big, beautiful heartland that’s in between.

Now, finally friends, I want you to try to picture this, it’s a nice thing to picture. Exactly one year from tomorrow, former President Barack Obama. He packs up the teleprompters and the selfie-sticks, and the Greek columns, and all that hopey, changey stuff and he heads on back to Chicago, where I’m sure he can find some community there to organize again. There, he can finally look up, President Obama will be able to look up, and there, over his head, he’ll be able to see that shining, towering, Trump tower. Yes, Barack, he built that, and that says a lot. Iowa, you say a lot, being here tonight, supporting the right man who will allow you to make America great again. God bless you! God bless the United States of America and our next president of the United States, Donald J. Trump!”

I didn't call the shots on a lot of that strategy.


I wish I could have done more interviews along the trail.


Larry, if they called an audible on me and if they say they want me in another position, I'm going to do it.


Right. And I did. I expressed my opinion, called it like I saw it and said before that election, as he had been found guilty on the seven counts, that he should step down.

Now he chose not to and voters in Alaska, at least thus far, until those final ballots are counted, it looks like they are reelecting Senator Stevens. And that's the will of the people. And I'm not a dictator. I'm not going to yank anything out from under the will of the people.

And now it will be up to the U.S. Senate to decide what happens next.

You know, not necessarily. I'm not going to close any doors that perhaps would be in front of me and would allow me to put to good use executive experience and a world view that I think is good for our nation. I'm not going to close any door there in terms of opportunity that may be there in the future.

But at this point, I love my job as governor. There's a tremendous amount of work to do in Alaska, as we develop our resources and contribute more to the United States of America, to allow us to be secure and prosperous.

I look forward to continuing doing my duties as governor.

If I hurt the ticket at all and cost John McCain even one vote, I am sorry about it, because John McCain is a true American hero. He's got great solutions in terms of the challenges that are facing America right now, with national security and needing to get our economy back on the right track.

John McCain has solutions. I look forward to seeing him as a leader in the Senate, reaching out to Barack Obama and the new administration, being able to work together with the solutions that he has.

Again, I'm sorry if I cost him any votes, if I did. KING: But you don't have an opinion as to whether you did or didn't?

I personally don't think that I, Sarah Palin from Alaska, the V.P. pick, I don't believe that I caused the outcome to be what it was.

I think the economy tanking -- tanking a couple of months ago had a lot more to do with it than the V.P. pick.

But, you know, I think, too, not winning the Hispanic vote and being outspent so tremendously in this campaign. John McCain had fulfilled his promise in just keeping with the public financing of the campaign. And Barack Obama went on to accept the private donations and contributions that allowed us to be very, very greatly outspent.

There were a lot of contributing factors. And I'm not going to point the finger right back at me and say that I was the cause of the outcome, but there were a lot of contributing factors.

But again, you know, if I caused even one person to shy away from electing an American hero, John McCain, to the presidency, then I apologize.

Oh, every Republican governor has a tremendous role to play in making sure that Americans understand that -- what it is that we do out there on the front lines, balancing multibillion dollar budgets and dealing with tens of thousands of employees in our organizations. The executive experience that we all have, as governors, needs to be put to good use in helping in this new administration...

...reaching out to Barack Obama in order to progress this nation and find solutions to the many challenges that we face.

Every Republican governor has much to contribute.

Well, I'm one of them. I am one of them, desiring to reach out and assist the new administration that's recently been elected.

What I can do, specifically, in helping our nation become energy independent, of course, comes from my experience as an oil and gas regulator in a huge energy-producing state and now as governor of that state. We know that we have the domestic solutions and the domestic supplies of energy. And we have the American ingenuity and we have the American workers ready to be put to use to allow our nation to become less dependent on foreign sources of energy, volatile foreign regimes that control too much of our energy supply and use energy as a weapon.

We need to get away from that. And domestic solutions that are at our fingertips -- I want to help lead in that area.

Also, what I can do as a Republican governor is do all that I can in my state and, hopefully, in the nation, also, in helping our families who have children with special needs.

It's an issue near and dear to my heart. It resonated well throughout the campaign, also. Americans recognizing that it's time that our families who have children and adults with special needs -- that America shows its good heart to them, also and we start cherishing every life. I want to help in that arena, also.

Again, I'm not going to close any doors of opportunity that perhaps are open out there in the future. Not having a crystal ball, I do not know what those opportunities will be. If I have to call an audible down the road here and circumstances change and the door is open for me to do so, it would be something that I would take that challenge on, that responsibility if I believe that it is in the nation's best interests.

But at this point, I'm very happy to get to serve my constituents in the great state of Alaska and start contributing our state more to national security and economic prosperity across America.

Alaska is growing up. We're growing together. And under our administration in that great state, we need to be doing more for the U.S. We're going to do more.


Sure, I should have done the Katie Couric interview. Her questions were fair...

I should have done it, yes. And her questions were fair. Obviously, being a bit annoyed with some of the questions, my annoyance shows through. And I am who I am, though, and I call it like I see it. And some of those questions, you know, regarding what do I read up in Alaska, were, to me, a bit irrelevant. And my annoyance at those questions showed through.

But there was nothing off-base, unfair about it. Certainly, I should have done the interview. And to attribute, I think, that interview to any kind of negativity in the campaign or a downfall in the campaign, I think it's ridiculous. And I wish that there would be -- would have been, perhaps, more dilution, in terms of that interview being one of many, many. I wish I could have done more interviews along the trail.

And in retrospect, in hindsight, I wish I would had more opportunities or that we would have seized more opportunities to speak more...

... to the American people through the media.

I didn't call the shots on the -- I didn't call the shots on a lot that strategy. But I'm not going to look backwards and point fingers of blame in regard to the strategy. And just suffice it to say, it's very, very important for candidates to be able to speak to the American voter. The electorate deserves to hear a person's positions, their values, their convictions, their plans, their records and their associations.

I'd love the opportunity to get to talk to Americans about my own...

...and John McCain's.

Well, thanks...

I'd say thank you, Katie Couric, for your advice. And I won't reciprocate in giving her any advice, that's for sure, because I have respect for her and the profession that she is in. I would have greater respect, though, for the entire profession called mainstream media if we could have great assurance that there's fairness, that there's objectivity throughout the reporting world.

And, you know, Larry, there, too, if there is anything that I can do in terms of assisting there and allowing the credence -- the credibility that that great vocation -- that cornerstone of our democracy called the press -- if I can help build up that credibility in the press and allow the electorate to know that they can believe everything that is reported through the airwaves and through print, I want to be able to help.

I started out as a journalist. It's that important to me that that cornerstone of our democracy is given the credence and credibility that it deserves.

But we have to have a two-way street here going, where reporters are fair, objective, non-biased; we get back to the who, what, where, when and why, and allow the viewers and the listeners and the readers to make up their own minds and not so much commentary, I think, being involved in mainstream media's questioning and reporting on candidates.

I'd like to kind of help build back that credibility in that cornerstone of our democracy called our media...

I am so happy to get to be with you all, and it’s pretty cool to see some of the College Republicans sitting down here where we met last time. I met some of you in the lobby, in addition to some of the great Independents and Libertarians who were out there too. They are awesome, and then last night meeting some of our proud, wonderful members of the military. I love you guys; you’re my heroes. I love you cause I love freedom, and like I always say, if you love your freedom, thank a Vet. We thank you guys.

It’s really, really good to be here today. I love coming back here because there are always so many young people, or, as you’re know by the folks across the river, ‘ObamaCare suckers. Yep, you are the ones, right? You’re the ones who pay the bills in our brave new world. They forgot that, didn’t they, when they said that you were the change that you were waiting for. Turns out, you have the change that they’re waiting for. You have the change, you have the fives, you have the tens, and twenties.

Well, it is great to be back here, because this is the place, CPAC is known as the place, where the future conservatism always starts; whether it was Ronald Reagan back in ’75 or Dr. Ben Carson, just like last year, this is where it starts, and it’s because of you and your energy, your commitment to the greatest, the greatest country on earth, the thing that makes her exceptional. It’s because of you. So I look at you and I feel good about America.

Now, when we were here last year, there was some reeling going on because of the election. Our fellow Americans had decided, evidently, to double-down on hopey-changey, and the Sages of the Beltway and their sock puppets at MSLSD, hat tip Mark Levin — they said that we had to give up on our principles, because they said, the train of history was roaring to the left so jump onboard or get left behind; but then, something happened, that ‘hope and change’ went from a catchy campaign slogan to a reality, and along the way, ‘hope and change,’ ‘yes we can,’ it became ‘no you can’t, nooooo, you can’t log on to the website, nooooo you can’t keep your health care, nooooo you can’t make a phone call without Michelle Obama knowing this is the third time this week you’ve dialed Pizza Hut delivery.

Yes, something did happen. We became a wiser Republican a year ago. Americans know now what the giants of our movement have always told us, people like Freidman and Reagan and Margaret Thatcher — they said, there ain’t no such thing as a free lunch. There is no free birth control. There’s no free phone. There’s no free doctor visits. There’s no free Fritos, there’s no free ride. Someone pays. Someone always pays, and if you don’t know who that someone is, it’s probably you. Americans found that out this year, and hopefully those socially-engineering politicos learned something as well. Americans aren’t quite as obedient as they thought we were.

See, they set up a lot of hoops, making us pay for insurance that we don’t want, don’t need, telling us, ah, nothing to see in Benghazi, move along, move along, nor at the IRS, nothing amiss, not even a smidgen — making us bear the brunt of that dopey wobbling on the world stage, but we didn’t jump through those hoops the way that we were supposed to. It’s like, y’all went rogue! I thank you!

Speaking of y’all, Texas, thank you, thank you Texas, because liberty needs a Congress on Cruz Control.

Yes, last year something did happen; the awakening did begin and Senator Ted Cruz helped keep them awake. His filibuster, it worked in waking people up to the folly of a government take-over of one-sixth of our economy. He forced debate. He told his colleagues, it was time, time to stand-up, time to use the tools of the Constitution, the power of the purse to fulfill their campaign promises and to stop ObamaCare, but our Army balked. We hoped that they were just reloading, but instead, they retreated, and worse, worse, they joined the lap dogs in the lame stream to trash the foot soldiers who had fought for America.

Ted Cruz, he had a clever way of doing it, too. Dr. Seuss, who’d a thunk? Who’d a thunk? a Yeah, good idea, maybe I’ll just ad lib something, yeah, right sure. But there he was reading it on the floor of the Senate, through air waves, he was telling his kids, I’m thinking of you, thinking of all our kids. I have five kids. I have five kids so reading Green Eggs and Ham over all those years, to each one, you know, you totally have it memorized by, especially by the time Trig was born, so I had to spice it up a bit, and little Trig, lucky little fella, his bedtime story, now it goes something like this:

I do not like this Uncle Sam
I do not like his health care scam
I do not like these dirty crooks or
How they lie and cook the books.
I do not like when Congress steals
I do not like their crony deals
I do not like this spying man
I do not like ‘Oh yes we can
I do not like this spending spree,
We’re smart, we know there’s nothing free
I do not like reporter’s smug replies
When I complain about their lies
I do not like this kind of hope, and
We wont’ take it nope, nope, nope

Hat tip the internet. I saw a couple of lines on the internet on that, and I winged the other ones.

Friends, Ted Cruz and Mike Lee and Paul and Gowdy and Gosar and Gohmert, etc., we’ve got some good guys in there, good guys, they carry the Common Sense gene. They know that we are a nation with a government, not the other way around. They are constitutionalists and they were sent to D.C. to fight the battle there for us, so it’s time, it’s time we send them reinforcements.

They need reinforcements, because you see, families are hurting today, hard workers, hard-working families. They’re caught between the capitalism that benefits the politically-connected and the income redistribution that benefits the politically-favored.

But still, I feel good about America because Conservatives haven’t forgotten the American beyond the ruling classes, wealthy D.C. suburbs. I’m talking about the places where most of the people who do the working and the serving and the building and the taxpaying live. That’s where you’ll find amazing America.

We are staying true to our principles — real solutions to real problems, and you got to hear some of those solutions the last couple of days. You’re not just sitting back, just hanging, hanging with the ‘Choom Gang, I hope your not, just letting D.C. control the people and bankrupt our country in order to fundamentally transform it.

That’s why I feel good, because you’re not just putting up with this. We do have some great pro-freedom, free market, pro-family that are clingers and wingers, aka great leaders, and they’re proposing ways to actually help the middle class and allow equal opportunity to work, and through self initiative, everyone be lifted and succeed, so I feel good.

I hear from you and I see you. I just feel that we know we’ve got each other’s backs and I feel that you know this is the stirring of the Great Awakening. I do believe that the eyes of America are open, unfortunately though, some would want you to just hit the snooze button and roll back over, like, ‘hush America, go back to sleep little lambs. Go back to sleep, close those eyes.’ Some of these folks are in the establishment, and they are a different breed of cats. They say that the smartest thing that we can do right now is just lay low, stay out-of-the-way while ObamaCare crashes and burns on its own and the economy sputters to a halt — forget all that solvency and insolvency stuff, just lay low, and as, while internationally, we so tick-off our allies and we lead a world that is looking for that shining city on a hill again, we lead them from behind? The result is some very, very, very bad dudes gain ground. This, instead of putting the fear of God in our enemies — proving peace through strength, and that is only brought to you courtesy of the red, white and blue. That’s only what the United States military can do.

But some GOP experts, they subscribe to the old saying, you know, don’t interrupt while they’re in the process of destroying themselves. Maybe true, but you do interrupt when they are in the process of destroying your country. So that’s what we’re going to do. We’re going to stop ’em 2014. We’re going to stop them, and by the way, complacent ones who had just shined the boot that would stop on our necks, working the status agenda of Obama, this applies to you too in the 2016 presidential race.  Speaking of…I should have, I didn’t get to run this morning, I was so busy man, and didn’t get to run.

But speaking of those who just carry the water, man, I feel sorry for some of those Cabinet members, frankly — take Secretary of State John Kerry. You say “take him, take him?” No really, I feel sorry because it’s just draining on him. He does not look happy. He has sent a message that this president is dazed and confused. Poor guy, you can just see it on him. Bless his heart, but no need to ask him any more why the long face. Now we know.

Those policies that the Cabinet have to explain and justify, how do you convey to Putin the threat that sounds like ‘Vladimir, don’t mess around, or you’re going to feel my flexibility, cause I got a phone and I got a pen and, um, I can dial real fast and poke you with my pen. Pinky promise.’

No, this is the guy who promised to provide for the sick, but there are more uninsured today than when Obama began this. He promised jobs for the jobless but fewer people work today than since the peanut farmer was our president, and the average family is bringing in $4,000 dollars less today than when Obama started all this. He promised us a safe peaceful world, promised he’s got al-Qaeda on the run, yeah, perhaps towards us. And safer? He would gut our arsenal, he allows others, enemies, to enrich theirs. Man, that’s just like a liberal on gun control. Mr. President, the only thing that stops a bad guy with a nuke is a good guy with a nuke.

He promised to heal the planet and stop the raise of the oceans, but the planet’s not listening to Dr. Obama.

The only thing rising in his la-la land is the Russian empire. I’m sorry, I’m probably being too hard on the president, after all, who could have seen this coming?

The GOP establishment, again, just going along to get along. You need another ‘come to Jesus meetin.’ It’s time, and the bottom line is today/ The Democrat’s agenda is a lost cause. President Obama, though, he is nothing if not poll-tested, so even he knows that the deep issue of our time is that pressing stagnation facing the middle class. Those good working class families, just can’t get ahead and that’s why he baits the GOP establishment into a kind of tit-for-tat, things to distract, and then they pander, and in the White House they do such damage, but their agenda is failure and fiasco on steroids.

America is counting on the GOP to get it right, and that’s why the establishment can’t blow it. No Republican gets elected promising higher taxes, wasteful spending, increased debt, bigger government, rewarding lawbreakers, amnesty — so why are they voting for these things now, and why reward them with your vote?

GOP Beltway Boys, yeah, GOP Beltway Boys, you know that 2010 victory that swept you into power? You didn’t build that, the TEA Party did, so dance with the one that brought ya. You want another sweep, grab a broom and join us at the party.

In this awakening, eyes are open, we’re stronger now, we’re wiser now, and God knows, we are hungry and there aren’t enough low-information voters in the country to save the other side this time, if we don’t retreat. And when we meet next, Lord willing, Harry Reid — either he will be the Senate minority leader or a blackjack dealer in Vegas, where everything stays in Vegas.

Another reason to feel good about our future and our movement, because we are pushing back against what some would call the ‘perpetual panties-in-a-wad’ people. You know them, these people are quick with quote about the latest victimized identity group. They are professionals at taking offense. It’s what they do, and their media minions are even quicker, seeking them out and publicizing their manufactured outrage. The play is always the same, someone on the right says something that isn’t politically correct, or it can be distorted not to sound politically correct, and it’s ‘perpetually wadded-up people’ that they get to work and they claim to want tolerance, open debate and their goal really is the complete opposite. Their goal is to shut-up anyone who doesn’t toe their line. What ever happened — you see or hear something, that kind of bugged you — buck up or stay in the truck? That’s how we grew up.

Remember when their skirts got all tangled-up over their heads when, recently, our buddy from Duck Dynasty, Phil — remember this? Here’s Phil, he’s talking about faith with a reporter from GQ, first mistake, but in between saying he loves humanity, he loves sinners, and leave it to God to judge. Well, he quoted the Bible and he got colorful with expressing his opinion, so what did that brilliant TV network do? They fired him. They canned the devout Christian for expressing his devout Christian views on a television show about his devout Christian family. Yeah, there’s nothing wrong, nothing out of line on cable TV, it’s those executives who get to school America on standards.

In another time though, that might have been it. Phil would have stayed fired, but not now, not this time, people all over America knew. It wasn’t just wingers and clingers, people all over America knew that Phil’s right to express himself, that fight that he had to undertake, well, that was all about our right to express ourselves. His fight was our fight and we pushed back and we won. And now everyone is happy, happy, happy.

You know, these are the same ‘fainting couch liberals,’ whining that we disrespect women. Bull. Hey, Democrats, it is your leaders who are demeaning to women. Liberals seem to think that the women of America are just cheap dates, you know, feed ’em a few lines about that free birth control, throw in a few scary quotes on the War on Women, then they will be yours. Don’t bother their pretty little heads with tax policy or debilitating debt or energy independence. Imagine if they treated the men like that? A quick word with the sisters here — guys just give us a minute, go play some racing game on your cell phone or something for a second, okay, while I talk to the ladies.

Girls, we know better than to fall for that victimization-line from the president and his party. I know you know better, but if you have a friend or a sister or a roommate, falling for that hooey, you gotta set ’em straight. Ask them, who’s really stereotyping you? Is it the people who believe you are a thinking, achieving, striving strong individual or those who put you in a box and they define you still by body parts. Enticing girls to think they need these guys to grow government to take care of them.

Women, don’t let them use you unless you choose to be their political pawn or just their piece of accessory on their arm. Honey, that’s not liberation, that’s subjugation and this sisterhood fights against that. We fight the mastery the big government would want over us, so who are the real women liberators? Hey, you can join us, be legit, because, come on libs, can you really sing, ‘I am woman hear me….’ No, cause donkeys just bray, only Mamma Grizzlies say ‘hear me roar.’

Let the women of America know our platform, our values, our independence, our work ethics. It’s family, faith and freedom. Be bold in making our case. We’re the heirs of Thatcher and Stanton and Anthony so stop apologizing, and start evangelizing and infiltrating, and influencing pop culture. If the boys aren’t up for the challenge, the girls are happy to lead the charge. This sisterhood so believes in respect, the powerful and purposeful potential of every woman so much so that we’re the party with the plank that protects even our littlest sisters in the womb.

Friends, last year I stood here and I declared that we’re not here to rebrand a party, we’re here to rebuild a country and what I meant was, we shouldn’t be in the business of using just the right poll-tested phraseology or pander to the right special interests. We’re in the business of digging ourselves out of debt, and restoring competitiveness, educating our children, and liberating our potential.

Truth be told, coming from a very diverse family and having a diverse career and being independent, I don’t care what you call yourself or how you rebrand a party. If you stand for those right things, I stand with you, and to stand here is to stand on the shoulder’s of giants.

The men and women who have come before, at podiums like this, in front of patriots like you — you’re the key — you’re what matters in all of this. But they, coming before, devoting their lives to preserving and protecting what is best in us — some were veterans, some were politicians, some housewives, speaking to soldiers, students and teachers, firemen, fishermen, farmers, of every race, color and creed — all were parts of a remarkable movement of freedom and human flourishing and for all they have given us, for all they have achieved, such a great price they paid — in their honor, work hard and feel good, knowing that the best is yet to come.

This is a great awakening. The Age of Obama is almost over — the end of an error. He is the lamest of lame ducks, so expand our ranks. We can do this. Expand our ranks to save our country, because our sensible and aperitiv mission for small government and big freedom is big enough for every American who loves liberty and trusts the individual. I know this because we know America, not from the top down but from the heart looking out.

Our message resonates. We believe in the promise of America, and that message does resonate and it has since the band of brothers dumped tea in the Boston harbor. We have to go be that band of brothers and sisters again, not to fundamentally change America but to save it and to fundamentally restore the promise of America. It is because of you, it’s We the People, because of you that I have never been more optimistic about the future of our one nation, under God, so stand up and stiffen your spine, you’ve got to fight for it, the best is yet to come. God bless you Conservatives. God bless America.

# From: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/akmuckraker/sarah-palins-farewell-add_b_245215.html

What an absolutely beautiful day it is, and it is my honor to speak to all Alaskans, to our Alaskan family this last time as your governor. And it is always great to be in Fairbanks. The rugged rugged hardy people that live up here and some of the most patriotic people whom you will ever know live here, and one thing that you are known for is your steadfast support of our military community up here and I thank you for that and thank you United States military for protecting the greatest nation on Earth. Together we stand.

And getting up here I say it is the best road trip in America soaring through nature’s finest show. Denali, the great one, soaring under the midnight sun. And then the extremes. In the winter time it’s the frozen road that is competing with the view of ice fogged frigid beauty, the cold though, doesn’t it split the Cheechakos from the Sourdoughs? And then in the summertime such extreme summertime about a hundred and fifty degrees hotter than just some months ago, than just some months from now, with fireweed blooming along the frost heaves and merciless rivers that are rushing and carving and reminding us that here, Mother Nature wins. It is as throughout all Alaska that big wild good life teeming along the road that is north to the future. That is what we get to see every day. Now what the rest of America gets to see along with us is in this last frontier there is hope and opportunity and there is country pride.

And it is our men and women in uniform securing it, and we are facing tough challenges in America with some seeming to just be Hell bent maybe on tearing down our nation, perpetuating some pessimism, and suggesting American apologetics, suggesting perhaps that our best days were yesterdays. But as other people have asked, “How can that pessimism be, when proof of our greatness, our pride today is that we produce the great proud volunteers who sacrifice everything for country?” Now this week alone, Sean Parnell and I we’re on the, um, on Ft. Rich the base there, the army chapel, and we heard the last roll call, and the sounding of Taps for three very brave, very young Alaskan soldiers who just gave their all for all of us. Together we do stand with gratitude for our troops who protect all of our cherished freedoms, including our freedom of speech which, par for the course, I’m going to exercise.

And first, some straight talk for some, just some in the media because another right protected for all of us is freedom of the press, and you all have such important jobs reporting facts and informing the electorate, and exerting power to influence. You represent what could and should be a respected honest profession that could and should be the cornerstone of our democracy. Democracy depends on you, and that is why, that’s why our troops are willing to die for you. So, how ‘bout in honor of the American soldier, ya quite makin’ things up. And don’t underestimate the wisdom of the people, and one other thing for the media, our new governor has a very nice family too, so leave his kids alone.

OK, today is a beautiful day and today as we swear in Sean Parnell, no one will be happier than I to witness by God’s grace Alaskans with strength of character advancing our beloved state. Sean has that. Craig Campbell has that. I remember on that December day, we took the oath to uphold our state constitution, and it was written right here in Fairbanks by very wise pioneers. We shared the vision for government that they ground in that document. Our founders wrote “all political power is inherent in the people. All government originates with the people. It’s founded upon their will only and it’s instituted for the good of the people as a whole.” Their remarkably succinct words guided us in all of our efforts in serving you and putting you first, and we have done our best to fulfill promises that I made on Alaska Day, 2005, when I first asked for the honor of serving you.

Remember then, our state so desired and so deserved ethics reform. We promised it, and now it is the law. Ironically, it needs additional reform to stop blatant abuse from partisan operatives, and I hope the lawmakers will continue that reform. We promised that you would finally see a fair return on your Alaskan owned natural resources so we build a new oil and gas appraisal system, an is an equitable formula to usher in a new era of competition and transparency and protection for Alaskans and the producers. ACES incentivizes new exploration and it’s the exploration that is our future. It opens up oil basins and it ensures that the people will never be taken advantage of again. Don’t forget Alaskans you are the resource owners per our constitution and that’s why for instance last year when oil prices soared and state coffers swelled, but you were smacked with high energy prices, we sent you the energy rebate. See, it’s your money and I’ve always believed that you know how to better spend it than government can spend it.

I promised that we would protect this beautiful environment while safely and ethically developing resources, and we did. We built the Petroleum Oversight Office and a sub-cabinet to study climate conditions. And I promised I’d govern with fiscal restraint, so to not immorally burden futre generations. And we did...we slowed the rate of government growth and I vetoed hundreds of millions of dollars of excess and wtih lawmakers we saved billions for the future.

I promsed that we’d lead the charge to forward funding education, and hold schools accountable, and improve opportunities for special needs students and elevate vo-tech training and we paid down pension debt.

I promised that we would manage our fish and wildlife for abundance, and that we would defend the constitution, and we have, though outside special interest groups they still just don’t get it on this one. Let me tell you, Alaskans really need to stick together on this with new leadership in this area especially, encouraging new leadership... got to stiffen your spine to do what’s right for Alaska when the pressure mounts, because you’re going to see anti-hunting, anti-second amendment circuses from Hollywood and here’s how they do it. They use these delicate, tiny, very talented celebrity starlets, they use Alaska as a fundraising tool for their anti-second amendment causes. Stand strong, and remind them patriots will protect our guaranteed, individual right to bear arms, and by the way, Hollywood needs to know, we eat, therefore we hunt.

I promised energy solutions and we have, we have a plan calling for 50% of our electricity generated by renewable resources and we can now insist that those who hold the leases to develop our resources that they do so now on Alaska’s terms. So now finally after decades of just talk, finally we’re seeing oil and gas drilling up there at Point Thompson. And I promised that we would get a natural gas pipeline underway and we did. Since I was a little kid growing up here, I remember the discussions, especially the political discussions just talking about and hoping for and dreaming of commercializing our clean, abundant, needed natural gas.

Our gas line inducement act, AGIA, that was the game-changer and this is thanks to our outstanding gas line team, and the legislature adopting this law, 58-1. They knew, they know AGIA is the vehicle to drive this monumental energy project and bring everyone to the table, this bipartisan victory, it came from Alaskans working together with free market private sector principles, and now we are on the road to the largest private-sector energy project in the history of America. It is for Alaska’s future, it is for America’s energy independence and it will make us a more peaceful, prosperous and secure nation.

What I promised, we accomplished. “We” meaning state staff, amazing commissioners, great staff assisting them, and conscientious Alaskans outside the bureaucracy - Tom Van Flein, and Meg Stapleton and Kristan Cole, so many others, many volunteers who just stepped up to the challenge as good Alaskans, but nothing, nothing could have succeeded without my right-hand man Kris Perry. She is the sharpest, boldest, hardest-working partner. Kris is my right-hand man and much success is due to Kris.

So much success, and Alaska there is much good in store further down the road, but to reach it we must value and live the optimistic pioneering spirit that made this state proud and free, and we can resist enslavement to big central government that crushes hope and opportunity. Be wary of accepting government largess. It doesn’t come free and often, accepting it takes away everything that is free, melting into Washington’s powerful “care-taking” arms will just suck incentive to work hard and chart our own course right out of us, and that not only contributes to an unstable economy and dizzying national debt, but it does make us less free.

I resisted the stimulus package. I resisted the stimulus package and we have championed earmark reform, slashing earmark requests by 85% to break the cycle of dependency on a stifling, unsustainable federal agenda, and other states should follow this for their and for America’s stability. We don’t have to feel that we must beg an allowance from Washington, except to beg the allowance to be self-determined. See, to be self-sufficient, Alaska must be allowed to develop - to drill and build and climb, to fulfill statehood’s promise. At statehood we knew this. At statehood we knew this, that we are responsible for ourselves and our families and our future, and fifty years later, please let’s not start believing that government is the answer. It can’t make you happy or healthy or wealthy or wise. What can? It is the wisdom of the people and our families and our small businesses, and industrious individuals, and it is God’s grace, helping those who help themselves, and then this allows that very generous voluntary hand up that we’re known for, enthusiastically providing those who need it.

Alaskans will remember that years ago, remember we sported the old bumper sticker that said, “Alaska. We Don’t Give a Darn How They Do It Outside?” Do you remember that? I remember that, and remember it was because we would be different. We’d roll up our sleeves, and we would diligently sow and reap, and we can still do this to carve wealth out of the wilderness and make our living on the water, with strong hands and innovative minds, now with smarter technology. It is what our first people and our parents did. It worked, because they worked. We must be prudent and persistent and press for the people’s right to responsibly develop God-given resources for the maximum benefit of the people.

And we have come so far in just 50 years. We’re no longer a frontier outpost on the periphery of the world’s greatest nation. Now, as a contributor and a securer of America, we can attain our destiny in the promise of our motto “North to the Future.” See, the pressing issue of our time, it’s energy independence, because there is an inherent link between energy and security, and energy and prosperity. Alaska will lead with energy, we will prove you can be both pro-development and pro-environment, because no one loves their clean air and their land and their wildlife and their water more than an Alaskan. We will protect it.

Yes, America must look north to the future for security, for energy independence, for our strategic location on the globe. Alaska is the gate-keeper of the continent.

So, we are here today at a changing of the guard. Now, people who know me, and they know how much I love this state, some still are choosing not to hear why I made the decision to chart a new course to advance the state. And it should be so obvious to you. (indicating heckler) It is because I love Alaska this much, sir (at heckler) that I feel it is my duty to avoid the unproductive, typical, politics as usual, lame duck session in one’s last year in office. How does that benefit you? No, with this decision now, I will be able to fight even harder for you, for what is right, for truth. And I have never felt like you need a title to do that.

So, as we all move forward together, let’s vow to keep championing Alaska, to advocate responsible development, and smaller government, and freedom, and when I took the oath to serve you, I promised...remember I promised to steadfastly and doggedly guard the interests of this great state like that grizzly guards her cubs, as a mother naturally guards her own. And I will keep that vow wherever the road may lead. Todd and I, and Track, Bristol, Tripp, Willow, Piper, Trig...I think I got ‘em all. We will forever be so grateful for the honor of our lifetime to have served you. Our whole big diverse full and fun family, we all thank you and I am very very blessed to have had their support all along, for Todd’s support. I am thankful too. I have been blessed to have been raised in this last frontier. Thank you for our home, Mom and Dad, because in Alaska it is not an easy living, but it is a good living, and here it is impossible to lose your way. Wherever the road may lead you, we have that steadying great north star to guide us home.

So let’s all enjoy the ride, and I thank you Alaska, and God bless Alaska and God bless America.

Nice to meet you.

Hey, can I call you Joe?

Thank you.

Thank you, Gwen. Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you, Gwen. And I thank the commission, also. I appreciate this privilege of being able to be here and speak with Americans.

You know, I think a good barometer here, as we try to figure out has this been a good time or a bad time in America's economy, is go to a kid's soccer game on Saturday, and turn to any parent there on the sideline and ask them, "How are you feeling about the economy?"

And I'll bet you, you're going to hear some fear in that parent's voice, fear regarding the few investments that some of us have in the stock market. Did we just take a major hit with those investments?

Fear about, how are we going to afford to send our kids to college? A fear, as small-business owners, perhaps, how we're going to borrow any money to increase inventory or hire more people.

The barometer there, I think, is going to be resounding that our economy is hurting and the federal government has not provided the sound oversight that we need and that we deserve, and we need reform to that end.

Now, John McCain thankfully has been one representing reform. Two years ago, remember, it was John McCain who pushed so hard with the Fannie Mae (NYSE:FNM) and Freddie Mac (NYSE:FRE) reform measures. He sounded that warning bell.

People in the Senate with him, his colleagues, didn't want to listen to him and wouldn't go towards that reform that was needed then. I think that the alarm has been heard, though, and there will be that greater oversight, again thanks to John McCain's bipartisan efforts that he was so instrumental in bringing folks together over this past week, even suspending his own campaign to make sure he was putting excessive politics aside and putting the country first.

John McCain, in referring to the fundamental of our economy being strong, he was talking to and he was talking about the American workforce. And the American workforce is the greatest in this world, with the ingenuity and the work ethic that is just entrenched in our workforce. That's a positive. That's encouragement. And that's what John McCain meant.

Now, what I've done as a governor and as a mayor is (inaudible) I've had that track record of reform. And I've joined this team that is a team of mavericks with John McCain, also, with his track record of reform, where we're known for putting partisan politics aside to just get the job done.

Now, Barack Obama, of course, he's pretty much only voted along his party lines. In fact, 96 percent of his votes have been solely along party line, not having that proof for the American people to know that his commitment, too, is, you know, put the partisanship, put the special interests aside, and get down to getting business done for the people of America.

We're tired of the old politics as usual. And that's why, with all due respect, I do respect your years in the U.S. Senate, but I think Americans are craving something new and different and that new energy and that new commitment that's going to come with reform.

I think that's why we need to send the maverick from the Senate and put him in the White House, and I'm happy to join him there.

Darn right it was the predator lenders, who tried to talk Americans into thinking that it was smart to buy a $300,000 house if we could only afford a $100,000 house. There was deception there, and there was greed and there is corruption on Wall Street. And we need to stop that.

Again, John McCain and I, that commitment that we have made, and we're going to follow through on that, getting rid of that corruption.

One thing that Americans do at this time, also, though, is let's commit ourselves just every day American people, Joe Six Pack, hockey moms across the nation, I think we need to band together and say never again. Never will we be exploited and taken advantage of again by those who are managing our money and loaning us these dollars. We need to make sure that we demand from the federal government strict oversight of those entities in charge of our investments and our savings and we need also to not get ourselves in debt. Let's do what our parents told us before we probably even got that first credit card. Don't live outside of our means. We need to make sure that as individuals we're taking personal responsibility through all of this. It's not the American peoples fault that the economy is hurting like it is, but we have an opportunity to learn a heck of a lot of good lessons through this and say never again will we be taken advantage of.

I would like to respond about the tax increases. We can speak in agreement here that darn right we need tax relief for Americans so that jobs can be created here. Now, Barack Obama and Senator Biden also voted for the largest tax increases in U.S. history. Barack had 94 opportunities to side on the people's side and reduce taxes and 94 times he voted to increase taxes or not support a tax reduction, 94 times.

Now, that's not what we need to create jobs and really bolster and heat up our economy. We do need the private sector to be able to keep more of what we earn and produce. Government is going to have to learn to be more efficient and live with less if that's what it takes to reign in the government growth that we've seen today. But we do need tax relief and Barack Obama even supported increasing taxes as late as last year for those families making only $42,000 a year. That's a lot of middle income average American families to increase taxes on them. I think that is the way to kill jobs and to continue to harm our economy.

I'm still on the tax thing because I want to correct you on that again. And I want to let you know what I did as a mayor and as a governor. And I may not answer the questions the way that either the moderator or you want to hear, but I'm going to talk straight to the American people and let them know my track record also. As mayor, every year I was in office I did reduce taxes. I eliminated personal property taxes and eliminated small business inventory taxes and as governor we suspended our state fuel tax. We did all of those things knowing that that is how our economy would be heated up. Now, as for John McCain's adherence to rules and regulations and pushing for even harder and tougher regulations, that is another thing that he is known for though. Look at the tobacco industry. Look at campaign finance reform.

I do take issue with some of the principle there with that redistribution of wealth principle that seems to be espoused by you. But when you talk about Barack's plan to tax increase affecting only those making $250,000 a year or more, you're forgetting millions of small businesses that are going to fit into that category. So they're going to be the ones paying higher taxes thus resulting in fewer jobs being created and less productivity.

Now you said recently that higher taxes or asking for higher taxes or paying higher taxes is patriotic. In the middle class of America which is where Todd and I have been all of our lives, that's not patriotic. Patriotic is saying, government, you know, you're not always the solution. In fact, too often you're the problem so, government, lessen the tax burden and on our families and get out of the way and let the private sector and our families grow and thrive and prosper. An increased tax formula that Barack Obama is proposing in addition to nearly a trillion dollars in new spending that he's proposing is the backwards way of trying to grow our economy.

I am because he's got a good health care plan that is detailed. And I want to give you a couple details on that. He's proposing a $5,000 tax credit for families so that they can get out there and they can purchase their own health care coverage. That's a smart thing to do. That's budget neutral. That doesn't cost the government anything as opposed to Barack Obama's plan to mandate health care coverage and have universal government run program and unless you're pleased with the way the federal government has been running anything lately, I don't think that it's going to be real pleasing for Americans to consider health care being taken over by the feds. But a $5,000 health care credit through our income tax that's budget neutral. That's going to help. And he also wants to erase those artificial lines between states so that through competition, we can cross state lines and if there's a better plan offered somewhere else, we would be able to purchase that. So affordability and accessibility will be the keys there with that $5,000 tax credit also being offered.

Well, the nice thing about running with John McCain is I can assure you he doesn't tell one thing to one group and then turns around and tells something else to another group, including his plans that will make this bailout plan, this rescue plan, even better.

I want to go back to the energy plan, though, because this is -- this is an important one that Barack Obama, he voted for in '05.

Senator Biden, you would remember that, in that energy plan that Obama voted for, that's what gave those oil companies those big tax breaks. Your running mate voted for that.

You know what I had to do in the state of Alaska? I had to take on those oil companies and tell them, "No," you know, any of the greed there that has been kind of instrumental, I guess, in their mode of operation, that wasn't going to happen in my state.

And that's why Tillerson at Exxon and Mulva at ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) , bless their hearts, they're doing what they need to do, as corporate CEOs, but they're not my biggest fans, because what I had to do up there in Alaska was to break up a monopoly up there and say, you know, the people are going to come first and we're going to make sure that we have value given to the people of Alaska with those resources.

And those huge tax breaks aren't coming to the big multinational corporations anymore, not when it adversely affects the people who live in a state and, in this case, in a country who should be benefiting at the same time. So it was Barack Obama who voted for that energy plan that gave those tax breaks to the oil companies that I then had to turn around, as a governor of an energy-producing state, and kind of undo in my own area of expertise, and that's energy.

There is not. And how long have I been at this, like five weeks? So there hasn't been a whole lot that I've promised, except to do what is right for the American people, put government back on the side of the American people, stop the greed and corruption on Wall Street.

And the rescue plan has got to include that massive oversight that Americans are expecting and deserving. And I don't believe that John McCain has made any promise that he would not be able to keep, either.

Yes, I would have. But here, again, there have -- there have been so many changes in the conditions of our economy in just even these past weeks that there has been more and more revelation made aware now to Americans about the corruption and the greed on Wall Street.

We need to look back, even two years ago, and we need to be appreciative of John McCain's call for reform with Fannie Mae, with Freddie Mac, with the mortgage-lenders, too, who were starting to really kind of rear that head of abuse.

And the colleagues in the Senate weren't going to go there with him. So we have John McCain to thank for at least warning people. And we also have John McCain to thank for bringing in a bipartisan effort people to the table so that we can start putting politics aside, even putting a campaign aside, and just do what's right to fix this economic problem that we are in.

It is a crisis. It's a toxic mess, really, on Main Street that's affecting Wall Street. And now we have to be ever vigilant and also making sure that credit markets don't seize up. That's where the Main Streeters like me, that's where we would really feel the effects.

That is not so, but because that's just a quick answer, I want to talk about, again, my record on energy versus your ticket's energy ticket, also.

I think that this is important to come back to, with that energy policy plan again that was voted for in '05.

When we talk about energy, we have to consider the need to do all that we can to allow this nation to become energy independent.

It's a nonsensical position that we are in when we have domestic supplies of energy all over this great land. And East Coast politicians who don't allow energy-producing states like Alaska to produce these, to tap into them, and instead we're relying on foreign countries to produce for us.

We're circulating about $700 billion a year into foreign countries, some who do not like America -- they certainly don't have our best interests at heart -- instead of those dollars circulating here, creating tens of thousands of jobs and allowing domestic supplies of energy to be tapped into and start flowing into these very, very hungry markets.

Energy independence is the key to this nation's future, to our economic future, and to our national security. So when we talk about energy plans, it's not just about who got a tax break and who didn't. And we're not giving oil companies tax breaks, but it's about a heck of a lot more than that.

Energy independence is the key to America's future.

Yes. Well, as the nation's only Arctic state and being the governor of that state, Alaska feels and sees impacts of climate change more so than any other state. And we know that it's real.

I'm not one to attribute every man -- activity of man to the changes in the climate. There is something to be said also for man's activities, but also for the cyclical temperature changes on our planet.

But there are real changes going on in our climate. And I don't want to argue about the causes. What I want to argue about is, how are we going to get there to positively affect the impacts?

We have got to clean up this planet. We have got to encourage other nations also to come along with us with the impacts of climate change, what we can do about that.

As governor, I was the first governor to form a climate change sub-cabinet to start dealing with the impacts. We've got to reduce emissions. John McCain is right there with an "all of the above" approach to deal with climate change impacts.

We've got to become energy independent for that reason. Also as we rely more and more on other countries that don't care as much about the climate as we do, we're allowing them to produce and to emit and even pollute more than America would ever stand for. So even in dealing with climate change, it's all the more reason that we have an "all of the above" approach, tapping into alternative sources of energy and conserving fuel, conserving our petroleum products and our hydrocarbons so that we can clean up this planet and deal with climate change.

Yes, Senator McCain does support this. The chant is "drill, baby, drill." And that's what we hear all across this country in our rallies because people are so hungry for those domestic sources of energy to be tapped into. They know that even in my own energy-producing state we have billions of barrels of oil and hundreds of trillions of cubic feet of clean, green natural gas. And we're building a nearly $40 billion natural gas pipeline which is North America's largest and most you expensive infrastructure project ever to flow those sources of energy into hungry markets.

Barack Obama and Senator Biden, you've said no to everything in trying to find a domestic solution to the energy crisis that we're in. You even called drilling -- safe, environmentally-friendly drilling offshore as raping the outer continental shelf.

There -- with new technology, with tiny footprints even on land, it is safe to drill and we need to do more of that. But also in that "all of the above" approach that Senator McCain supports, the alternative fuels will be tapped into: the nuclear, the clean coal.

I was surprised to hear you mention that because you had said that there isn't anything -- such a thing as clean coal. And I think you said it in a rope line, too, at one of your rallies.

I do. I do.

Well, not if it goes closer and closer towards redefining the traditional definition of marriage between one man and one woman. And unfortunately that's sometimes where those steps lead.

But I also want to clarify, if there's any kind of suggestion at all from my answer that I would be anything but tolerant of adults in America choosing their partners, choosing relationships that they deem best for themselves, you know, I am tolerant and I have a very diverse family and group of friends and even within that group you would see some who may not agree with me on this issue, some very dear friends who don't agree with me on this issue.

But in that tolerance also, no one would ever propose, not in a McCain-Palin administration, to do anything to prohibit, say, visitations in a hospital or contracts being signed, negotiated between parties.

But I will tell Americans straight up that I don't support defining marriage as anything but between one man and one woman, and I think through nuances we can go round and round about what that actually means.

But I'm being as straight up with Americans as I can in my non- support for anything but a traditional definition of marriage.

Your question to him was whether he supported gay marriage and my answer is the same as his and it is that I do not.

I am very thankful that we do have a good plan and the surge and the counterinsurgency strategy in Iraq that has proven to work, I am thankful that that is part of the plan implemented under a great American hero, General Petraeus, and pushed hard by another great American, Senator John McCain.

I know that the other ticket opposed this surge, in fact, even opposed funding for our troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. Barack Obama voted against funding troops there after promising that he would not do so.

And Senator Biden, I respected you when you called him out on that. You said that his vote was political and you said it would cost lives. And Barack Obama at first said he would not do that. He turned around under political pressure and he voted against funding the troops. We do have a plan for withdrawal. We don't need early withdrawal out of Iraq. We cannot afford to lose there or we're going to be no better off in the war in Afghanistan either. We have got to win in Iraq.

And with the surge that has worked we're now down to presurge numbers in Iraq. That's where we can be. We can start putting more troops in Afghanistan as we also work with our NATO allies who are there strengthening us and we need to grow our military. We cannot afford to lose against al Qaeda and the Shia extremists who are still there, still fighting us, but we're getting closer and closer to victory. And it would be a travesty if we quit now in Iraq.

Your plan is a white flag of surrender in Iraq and that is not what our troops need to hear today, that's for sure. And it's not what our nation needs to be able to count on. You guys opposed the surge. The surge worked. Barack Obama still can't admit the surge works.

We'll know when we're finished in Iraq when the Iraqi government can govern its people and when the Iraqi security forces can secure its people. And our commanders on the ground will tell us when those conditions have been met. And Maliki and Talabani also in working with us are knowing again that we are getting closer and closer to that point, that victory that's within sight.

Now, you said regarding Senator McCain's military policies there, Senator Biden, that you supported a lot of these things. In fact, you said in fact that you wanted to run, you'd be honored to run with him on the ticket. That's an indication I think of some of the support that you had at least until you became the VP pick here.

You also said that Barack Obama was not ready to be commander in chief. And I know again that you opposed the move he made to try to cut off funding for the troops and I respect you for that. I don't know how you can defend that position now but I know that you know especially with your son in the National Guard and I have great respect for your family also and the honor that you show our military. Barack Obama though, another story there. Anyone I think who can cut off funding for the troops after promising not to is another story.

Both are extremely dangerous, of course. And as for who coined that central war on terror being in Iraq, it was the General Petraeus and al Qaeda, both leaders there and it's probably the only thing that they're ever going to agree on, but that it was a central war on terror is in Iraq. You don't have to believe me or John McCain on that. I would believe Petraeus and the leader of al Qaeda.

An armed, nuclear armed especially Iran is so extremely dangerous to consider. They cannot be allowed to acquire nuclear weapons period. Israel is in jeopardy of course when we're dealing with Ahmadinejad as a leader of Iran. Iran claiming that Israel as he termed it, a stinking corpse, a country that should be wiped off the face of the earth. Now a leader like Ahmadinejad who is not sane or stable when he says things like that is not one whom we can allow to acquire nuclear energy, nuclear weapons. Ahmadinejad, Kim Jong Il, the Castro brothers, others who are dangerous dictators are one that Barack Obama has said he would be willing to meet with without preconditions being met first.

And an issue like that taken up by a presidential candidate goes beyond naivete and goes beyond poor judgment. A statement that he made like that is downright dangerous because leaders like Ahmadinejad who would seek to acquire nuclear weapons and wipe off the face of the earth an ally like we have in Israel should not be met with without preconditions and diplomatic efforts being undertaken first.

No and Dr. Henry Kissinger especially. I had a good conversation with him recently. And he shared with me his passion for diplomacy. And that's what John McCain and I would engage in also. But again, with some of these dictators who hate America and hate what we stand for, with our freedoms, our democracy, our tolerance, our respect for women's rights, those who would try to destroy what we stand for cannot be met with just sitting down on a presidential level as Barack Obama had said he would be willing to do. That is beyond bad judgment. That is dangerous.

No, diplomacy is very important. First and foremost, that is what we would engage in. But diplomacy is hard work by serious people. It's lining out clear objectives and having your friends and your allies ready to back you up there and have sanctions lined up before any kind of presidential summit would take place.

Yes.

A two-state solution is the solution. And Secretary Rice, having recently met with leaders on one side or the other there, also, still in these waning days of the Bush administration, trying to forge that peace, and that needs to be done, and that will be top of an agenda item, also, under a McCain-Palin administration.

Israel is our strongest and best ally in the Middle East. We have got to assure them that we will never allow a second Holocaust, despite, again, warnings from Iran and any other country that would seek to destroy Israel, that that is what they would like to see.

We will support Israel. A two-state solution, building our embassy, also, in Jerusalem, those things that we look forward to being able to accomplish, with this peace-seeking nation, and they have a track record of being able to forge these peace agreements.

They succeeded with Jordan. They succeeded with Egypt. I'm sure that we're going to see more success there, also.

It's got to be a commitment of the United States of America, though. And I can promise you, in a McCain-Palin administration, that commitment is there to work with our friends in Israel.

No, I do not believe that it has been. But I'm so encouraged to know that we both love Israel, and I think that is a good thing to get to agree on, Senator Biden. I respect your position on that.

No, in fact, when we talk about the Bush administration, there's a time, too, when Americans are going to say, "Enough is enough with your ticket," on constantly looking backwards, and pointing fingers, and doing the blame game.

There have been huge blunders in the war. There have been huge blunders throughout this administration, as there are with every administration.

But for a ticket that wants to talk about change and looking into the future, there's just too much finger-pointing backwards to ever make us believe that that's where you're going.

Positive change is coming, though. Reform of government is coming. We'll learn from the past mistakes in this administration and other administrations.

And we're going to forge ahead with putting government back on the side of the people and making sure that our country comes first, putting obsessive partisanship aside.

That's what John McCain has been known for in all these years. He has been the maverick. He has ruffled feathers.

But I know, Senator Biden, you have respected for them that, and I respect you for acknowledging that. But change is coming.

Nuclear weaponry, of course, would be the be all, end all of just too many people in too many parts of our planet, so those dangerous regimes, again, cannot be allowed to acquire nuclear weapons, period.

Our nuclear weaponry here in the U.S. is used as a deterrent. And that's a safe, stable way to use nuclear weaponry.

But for those countries -- North Korea, also, under Kim Jong-il -- we have got to make sure that we're putting the economic sanctions on these countries and that we have friends and allies supporting us in this to make sure that leaders like Kim Jong-il and Ahmadinejad are not allowed to acquire, to proliferate, or to use those nuclear weapons. It is that important.

Can we talk about Afghanistan real quick, also, though?

OK, I'd like to just really quickly mention there, too, that when you look back and you say that the Bush administration's policy on Afghanistan perhaps would be the same as McCain, and that's not accurate.

The surge principles, not the exact strategy, but the surge principles that have worked in Iraq need to be implemented in Afghanistan, also. And that, perhaps, would be a difference with the Bush administration.

Now, Barack Obama had said that all we're doing in Afghanistan is air-raiding villages and killing civilians. And such a reckless, reckless comment and untrue comment, again, hurts our cause.

That's not what we're doing there. We're fighting terrorists, and we're securing democracy, and we're building schools for children there so that there is opportunity in that country, also. There will be a big difference there, and we will win in -- in Afghanistan, also.

Well, first, McClellan did not say definitively the surge principles would not work in Afghanistan. Certainly, accounting for different conditions in that different country and conditions are certainly different. We have NATO allies helping us for one and even the geographic differences are huge but the counterinsurgency principles could work in Afghanistan. McClellan didn't say anything opposite of that. The counterinsurgency strategy going into Afghanistan, clearing, holding, rebuilding, the civil society and the infrastructure can work in Afghanistan. And those leaders who are over there, who have also been advising George Bush on this have not said anything different but that.

Oh, yeah, it's so obvious I'm a Washington outsider. And someone just not used to the way you guys operate. Because here you voted for the war and now you oppose the war. You're one who says, as so many politicians do, I was for it before I was against it or vice- versa. Americans are craving that straight talk and just want to know, hey, if you voted for it, tell us why you voted for it and it was a war resolution.

And you had supported John McCain's military strategies pretty adamantly until this race and you had opposed very adamantly Barack Obama's military strategy, including cutting off funding for the troops that attempt all through the primary.

And I watched those debates, so I remember what those were all about.

But as for as Darfur, we can agree on that also, the supported of the no-fly zone, making sure that all options are on the table there also.

America is in a position to help. What I've done in my position to help, as the governor of a state that's pretty rich in natural resources, we have a $40 billion investment fund, a savings fund called the Alaska Permanent Fund.

When I and others in the legislature found out we had some millions of dollars in Sudan, we called for divestment through legislation of those dollars to make sure we weren't doing anything that would be seen as condoning the activities there in Darfur. That legislation hasn't passed yet but it needs to because all of us, as individuals, and as humanitarians and as elected officials should do all we can to end those atrocities in that region of the world.

I beg to disagree with you, again, here on whether you supported Barack Obama or John McCain's strategies. Here again, you can say what you want to say a month out before people are asked to vote on this, but we listened to the debates.

I think tomorrow morning, the pundits are going to start do the who said what at what time and we'll have proof of some of this, but, again, John McCain who knows how to win a war. Who's been there and he's faced challenges and he knows what evil is and knows what it takes to overcome the challenges here with our military.

He knows to learn from the mistakes and blunders we have seen in the war in Iraq, especially. He will know how to implement the strategies, working with our commanders and listening to what they have to say, taking the politics out of these war issues. He'll know how to win a war.

And heaven forbid, yes, that would ever happen, no matter how this ends up, that that would ever happen with either party.

As for disagreeing with John McCain and how our administration would work, what do you expect? A team of mavericks, of course we're not going to agree on 100 percent of everything. As we discuss ANWR there, at least we can agree to disagree on that one. I will keep pushing him on ANWR. I have so appreciated he has never asked me to check my opinions at the door and he wants a deliberative debate and healthy debate so we can make good policy.

What I would do also, if that were to ever happen, though, is to continue the good work he is so committed to of putting government back on the side of the people and get rid of the greed and corruption on Wall Street and in Washington.

I think we need a little bit of reality from Wasilla Main Street there, brought to Washington, DC.

So that people there can understand how the average working class family is viewing bureaucracy in the federal government and Congress and inaction of Congress.

Just everyday working class Americans saying, you know, government, just get out of my way. If you're going to do any harm and mandate more things on me and take more of my money and income tax and business taxes, you're going to have a choice in just a few weeks here on either supporting a ticket that wants to create jobs and bolster our economy and win the war or you're going to be supporting a ticket that wants to increase taxes, which ultimately kills jobs, and is going to hurt our economy.

Say it ain't so, Joe, there you go again pointing backwards again. You preferenced your whole comment with the Bush administration. Now doggone it, let's look ahead and tell Americans what we have to plan to do for them in the future. You mentioned education and I'm glad you did. I know education you are passionate about with your wife being a teacher for 30 years, and god bless her. Her reward is in heaven, right? I say, too, with education, America needs to be putting a lot more focus on that and our schools have got to be really ramped up in terms of the funding that they are deserving. Teachers needed to be paid more. I come from a house full of school teachers. My grandma was, my dad who is in the audience today, he's a schoolteacher, had been for many years. My brother, who I think is the best schoolteacher in the year, and here's a shout-out to all those third graders at Gladys Wood Elementary School, you get extra credit for watching the debate.

Education credit in American has been in some sense in some of our states just accepted to be a little bit lax and we have got to increase the standards. No Child Left Behind was implemented. It's not doing the job though. We need flexibility in No Child Left Behind. We need to put more of an emphasis on the profession of teaching. We need to make sure that education in either one of our agendas, I think, absolute top of the line. My kids as public school participants right now, it's near and dear to my heart. I'm very, very concerned about where we're going with education and we have got to ramp it up and put more attention in that arena.

In my comment there, it was a lame attempt at a joke and yours was a lame attempt at a joke, too, I guess, because nobody got it. Of course we know what a vice president does.

No, no. Of course, we know what a vice president does. And that's not only to preside over the Senate and will take that position very seriously also. I'm thankful the Constitution would allow a bit more authority given to the vice president if that vice president so chose to exert it in working with the Senate and making sure that we are supportive of the president's policies and making sure too that our president understands what our strengths are. John McCain and I have had good conversations about where I would lead with his agenda. That is energy independence in America and reform of government over all, and then working with families of children with special needs. That's near and dear to my heart also. In those arenas, John McCain has already tapped me and said, that's where I want you, I want you to lead. I said, I can't wait to get and there go to work with you.

Well, our founding fathers were very wise there in allowing through the Constitution much flexibility there in the office of the vice president. And we will do what is best for the American people in tapping into that position and ushering in an agenda that is supportive and cooperative with the president's agenda in that position. Yeah, so I do agree with him that we have a lot of flexibility in there, and we'll do what we have to do to administer very appropriately the plans that are needed for this nation. And it is my executive experience that is partly to be attributed to my pick as V.P. with McCain, not only as a governor, but earlier on as a mayor, as an oil and gas regulator, as a business owner. It is those years of experience on an executive level that will be put to good use in the White House also.

My experience as an executive will be put to good use as a mayor and business owner and oil and gas regulator and then as governor of a huge state, a huge energy producing state that is accounting for much progress towards getting our nation energy independence and that's extremely important.

But it wasn't just that experience tapped into, it was my connection to the heartland of America. Being a mom, one very concerned about a son in the war, about a special needs child, about kids heading off to college, how are we going to pay those tuition bills? About times and Todd and our marriage in our past where we didn't have health insurance and we know what other Americans are going through as they sit around the kitchen table and try to figure out how are they going to pay out-of-pocket for health care? We've been there also so that connection was important.

But even more important is that world view that I share with John McCain. That world view that says that America is a nation of exceptionalism. And we are to be that shining city on a hill, as President Reagan so beautifully said, that we are a beacon of hope and that we are unapologetic here. We are not perfect as a nation. But together, we represent a perfect ideal. And that is democracy and tolerance and freedom and equal rights. Those things that we stand for that can be put to good use as a force for good in this world.

John McCain and I share that. You combine all that with being a team with the only track record of making a really, a difference in where we've been and reforming, that's a good team, it's a good ticket.

People aren't looking for more of the same. They are looking for change. And John McCain has been the consummate maverick in the Senate over all these years.

He's taken shots left and right from the other party and from within his own party, because he's had to take on his own party when the time was right, when he recognized it was time to put partisanship aside and just do what was right for the American people. That's what I've done as governor, also, take on my own party, when I had to, and work with both sides of the aisle, in my cabinet, appointing those who would serve regardless of party, Democrats, independents, Republicans, whatever it took to get the job done.

Also, John McCain's maverick position that he's in, that's really prompt up to and indicated by the supporters that he has. Look at Lieberman, and Giuliani, and Romney, and Lingle, and all of us who come from such a diverse background of -- of policy and of partisanship, all coming together at this time, recognizing he is the man that we need to leave -- lead in these next four years, because these are tumultuous times.

We have got to win the wars. We have got to get our economy back on track. We have got to not allow the greed and corruption on Wall Street anymore.

And we have not got to allow the partisanship that has really been entrenched in Washington, D.C., no matter who's been in charge. When the Republicans were in charge, I didn't see a lot of progress there, either. When the Democrats, either, though, this last go- around for the last two years.

Change is coming. And John McCain is the leader of that reform.

There have been times where, as mayor and governor, we have passed budgets that I did not veto and that I think could be considered as something that I quasi-caved in, if you will, but knowing that it was the right thing to do in order to progress the agenda for that year and to work with the legislative body, that body that actually holds the purse strings.

So there were times when I wanted to zero-base budget, and to cut taxes even more, and I didn't have enough support in order to accomplish that.

But on the major principle things, no, there hasn't been something that I've had to compromise on, because we've always seemed to find a way to work together. Up there in Alaska, what we have done is, with bipartisan efforts, is work together and, again, not caring who gets the credit for what, as we accomplish things up there.

And that's been just a part of the operation that I wanted to participate in. And that's what we're going to do in Washington, D.C., also, bring in both sides together. John McCain is known for doing that, also, in order to get the work done for the American people.

You do what I did as governor, and you appoint people regardless of party affiliation, Democrats, independents, Republicans. You -- you walk the walk; you don't just talk the talk.

And even in my own family, it's a very diverse family. And we have folks of all political persuasion in there, also, so I've grown up just knowing that, you know, at the end of the day, as long as we're all working together for the greater good, it's going to be OK.

But the policies and the proposals have got to speak for themselves, also. And, again, voters on November 4th are going to have that choice to either support a ticket that supports policies that create jobs.

You do that by lowering taxes on American workers and on our businesses. And you build up infrastructure, and you rein in government spending, and you make our -- our nation energy independent.

Or you support a ticket that supports policies that will kill jobs by increasing taxes. And that's what the track record shows, is a desire to increase taxes, increase spending, a trillion-dollar spending proposal that's on the table. That's going to hurt our country, and saying no to energy independence. Clear choices on November 4th.

Well, again, Gwen, I do want to thank you and the commission. This is such an honor for me.

And I appreciate, too, Senator Biden, getting to meet you, finally, also, and getting to debate with you. And I would like more opportunity for this.

I like being able to answer these tough questions without the filter, even, of the mainstream media kind of telling viewers what they've just heard. I'd rather be able to just speak to the American people like we just did.

And it's so important that the American people know of the choices that they have on November 4th.

I want to assure you that John McCain and I, we're going to fight for America. We're going to fight for the middle-class, average, everyday American family like mine.

I've been there. I know what the hurts are. I know what the challenges are. And, thank God, I know what the joys are, too, of living in America. We are so blessed. And I've always been proud to be an American. And so has John McCain.

We have to fight for our freedoms, also, economic and our national security freedoms.

It was Ronald Reagan who said that freedom is always just one generation away from extinction. We don't pass it to our children in the bloodstream; we have to fight for it and protect it, and then hand it to them so that they shall do the same, or we're going to find ourselves spending our sunset years telling our children and our children's children about a time in America, back in the day, when men and women were free.

We will fight for it, and there is only one man in this race who has really ever fought for you, and that's Senator John McCain.

I do. I'm a feminist who believes in equal rights and I believe that women certainly today have every opportunity that a man has to succeed and to try to do it all anyway. And I'm very, very thankful that I've been brought up in a family where gender hasn't been an issue. You know, I've been expected to do everything growing up that the boys were doing. We were out chopping wood and you're out hunting and fishing and filling our freezer with good wild Alaskan game to feed our family. So it kinda started with that. With just that expectation that the boys and the girls in my community were expected to do the same and accomplish the same. That's just been instilled in me.
Someone who believes in equal rights. Someone who would not stand for oppression against women.
I'm absolutely for equal pay for equal work. The Ledbetter pay act - it was gonna turn into a boon for trial lawyers who, I believe, could have taken advantage of women who were many, many years ago who would allege some kind of discrimination. Thankfully, there are laws on the books, there have been since 1963, that no woman could be discriminated against in the workplace in terms of anything, but especially in terms of pay. So, thankfully we have the laws on the books and they better be enforced.
There should be no fear of a lawsuit prohibiting a woman from making sure that the laws that are on the books today are enforced. I know in a McCain-Palin administration we will not stand for any measure that would result in a woman being paid less than a man for equal work.
It would have turned into a boon for trial lawyers. Again, thankfully with the existing laws we have on the books, they better be enforced. We won't stand for anything but that. We won't stand for any discrimination in the workplace - that there isn't any discrimination in America.
No. I don't. It's obvious there are some double standards here. You know, in terms of what the media has been doing. But I think that's more attributable to the Washington media elite not knowing who I am and just asking a whole lot of questions. Not so much based on gender, though. But based on just the fact that I'm not part of the Washington herd.
It would be sexist if the media were to hold back and not ask me about my experience, my vision, my principles, my values. You're right.
I am so happy to talk to reporters. My life is an open book, happy to do it and very happy for more opportunities to do so.
The campaign knows that I am an open book. I mean, obviously is out there for God and everyone to judge my voting record, actions that I've taken as an administrator, as an executive, as a business owner, as a mom. My record is out there and my life is out there.
I think this may be a little bit more about a campaign of reform, where just because maybe someone in the media elite hasn't had the access that maybe they're demanding, because we're running the campaign the way that we believe will best result in a good result for America - and that is a victory for John McCain. And maybe some are kind of put off by that. But that's all part of no more politics as usual; no more business as usual. I'm out there talking to the American people, those who I so dearly love and care about. I'm talking to them in these rallies that are attracting 20 - 30,000-plus people. I'm doing these rope-lines. I'm talking to every individual American that I can, in every hour that I have in my day. That's who I will be serving, that's who I'm connecting with today.
And it's why we should have started ten years ago tapping into domestic supplies that America is so rich in. Alaska has billions of barrels of oil and hundreds of trillions of cubic feet of clean, green natural gas onshore and offshore. Should have started doing it ten years ago but better late than never. We need to make sure that our nation's taking those steps to become energy independent.
Of course, ramping up supplies domestically is a key to that. But so is weaning ourselves off the hydrocarbons. We have got to get on board with the alternative fuel. John McCain has some great plans there. Also tapping into the nuclear, the clean coal to biomass, geothermal, tides, waves, all those things that we have as alternative energy sources, it's gotta be an all-of-the-above approach to energy independence. We cannot keep going down the road that we're going on now. And that's circulating nearly $700 billion, American dollars, into other countries, ramping up, boosting up their economy, decimating our own, not when we have the solution here domestically.
Yeah.
I don't think there's any need to characterize anything as caving. We'll continue to work together on this issue. And that issue is domestic supplies of energy being tapped, flowing into very, very, very hungry markets across our U.S. And we are on the same page there in seeking solutions to reach that goal.
Yeah, I don't know who the …
…experts are who say that it would take 20 years. As the governor of an energy-producing state, we're supplying 16, 17 percent of the U.S. domestic supply of energy coming from my state. And as the former chairman of the Interstate Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, the geologists, the petroleum engineers whom I speak with are saying it can be done a lot quicker than 20 years from now. And, remember ANWR is a 2,000-acre plot that's in the midst of 21 million acres. That's not where the supply of domestic energy sources is, though, necessarily. I mean, that's not the be-all, end-all. Offshore is where the supply of energy is. And we'll tap into that. 
We had a great discussion with President Zardari as we talked about what it is that America can and should be doing together to make sure that the terrorists do not cross borders and do not ultimately put themselves in a position of attacking America again or her allies. And we will do what we have to do to secure the United States of America and her allies.
In fact, you're absolutely right on. In the context, this was … a voter, a constituent, hollering out a question from across an area asking, "What are you gonna do about Pakistan? You better have an answer to Pakistan." I said we're gonna do what we have to do to protect the United States of America.
Well, as Sen. McCain is suggesting here, also, never would our administration get out there and show our cards to terrorists, in this case, to enemies and let them know what the game plan was, not when that could ultimately adversely affect a plan to keep America secure.
That this is all about "gotcha" journalism. A lot of it is. (laughter) But that's okay, too.
That's okay.
Well, I don't know who she is, and I apologize for that. So, and I don't wanna offend her, but I don't know who she is. So I won't take …
… her words necessarily to heart.
Well, not only am I ready but willing and able to serve as vice president with Sen. McCain if Americans so bless us and privilege us with the opportunity of serving them, ready with my executive experience as a city mayor and manager, as a governor, as a commissioner, a regulator of oil and gas, not only with my résumé proving that readiness, but I think the important thing here is that John McCain and I, we share a vision for America that includes energy independence.
It includes securing our nation, first and foremost. It includes an environment where we are cherishing every child in this country and we are providing them good education opportunities. And top of our agenda, too, in getting our economy back on track, we share a vision of job creation in America so the hard-working American families can start paying their bills, not worrying so much about their future, their retirements. I look forward to working with him on those items on our agenda.
Thank you.
Well, we're the only arctic state, of course, Alaska. So we feel the impacts more than any other state up there, with the changes in the climates. And certainly it is apparent. We have erosion issues and we have melting sea ice, of course. So what I've done up there is form a sub-cabinet to focus solely on climate change. Understanding that it is real.
You know … there are man's activities that can be contributed to … the issues that we're dealing with now with these impacts. I'm not going to solely blame all of man's activities on changes in climate. Because the world's weather patterns … are cyclical. And over history we have seen changes there. But kind of doesn't matter at this point, as we debate what caused it. The point is it's real, we need to do something about it. And like … Tony Blair had said … when he was in leadership position, he said, "Let's all consider the fact that it is real." So instead of pointing fingers … at different sides of the argument as to who is to blame, and if nature just to blame, let's do something about it. Let's clean up our world. Let's reduce emissions. And let's go with reality.
Well, human beings certainly are contributing to pollution today. And to some adverse effects on the environment. And it's all of our jobs to do to clean things up. And that's what we're committed to doing.
I believe that there are a lot of causes. And there is one effect. And one is changes in the climate. And there are things that we can do to make sure we're cleaning up the environment. I also formed an integrity office that solely is focused on petroleum, on pipelines, on those things that we do up there in Alaska to contribute to the U.S. domestic supply of energy.
Where we can focus solely on environmental protections. There are a lot of things that I've done there in that arena of environmental protection that have kind of ticked off some in my own party thinking that I went too far. But I've always been of the mind that, you know, we gotta prove that we can do this right. Safely, ethically, environmentally friendly developments, or we're not gonna be allowed to unlock our lands and tap these supplies.
I support his position on that. Absolutely.
He's got a good cap and trade policy that he supports. And details are being hashed out even right now. But, in principle, absolutely, I support all that we can do to reduce emissions and to clean up this planet. And john McCain is right on board with that.
We're gonna keep working on how it can be implemented to actually make sense and make a difference.
I am pro-life. And I'm unapologetic about my position there on pro-life. And I understand good people on both sides of the abortion debate. In fact, good people in my own family have differing views on abortion and when it should be allowed. So … I respect people's opinion on this.
Now, I would counsel to choose life. I would like to see a culture of life in this country. But I would also like to see taking it one step further. Not just saying I am pro-life, and I want fewer and fewer abortions in this country. But I want, then, those women who find themselves in circumstances that are absolutely less than ideal, for them to be supported for adoptions to be made easier. For more support given to foster parents and adoptive families. That is my personal opinion on this.
If you …
I'm saying that, personally, I would counsel the person to choose life, despite horrific, horrific circumstances that this person would find themselves in. And, um, if you're asking, though, kind of foundationally here, should anyone end up in jail for having an … abortion, absolutely not. That's nothing I would ever support.
Then, now, some may characterize my position as being extreme, because I am pro-life … and I want women empowered to know that, you know, we can help them. They can be strong enough, and they can have the resources provided them to give that child life.
The extremism, to me, is those who would support partial-birth abortion. Those who would disallow parental consent when it comes to a minor child who would seek an abortion. I think parents should have a say in that. They should be a part of their child's health care there. And those who, like Barack Obama, would support measures that would actually allow in a botched abortion, late-term abortion, that child being born alive, to allow it to not receive medical help to save that child's life. That's extremism to me. That is so far on the left side of the political spectrum and public sentiment in this country. That's the extremism to me.
I would like to see more women given more support so that those of us who say, "You know, a culture of life is what we believe." Is best … for human kind, you know, to respect the sanctity of every human life. And to understand … that we live in a pretty messed up world sometimes.
When you consider what's going on in this world. The most promising and good ingredients in this world … is a child. The hope that a child brings. And just understanding that. Being near and dear to my heart. I want to do all that I can to reduce the number abortions.
And to usher in that culture of life. And in my respect for the other side of this issue, I have not spoken with one woman who do, may disagree with me on, when abortions could or should be allowed, not one woman has disagreed, as we sit down and rationally talk about … the common goal we have, and that is to see fewer and fewer abortions. And to provide more and more women support in this world.
Well …I'm all for contraception. And I'm all for any preventative measures that are legal and safe and should be taken. But, Katie, again and we can go round and round about the abortion issue, but I am one to seek a culture of life. I am one to believe that life starts at the moment of conception. And I would like to see …
I would like to see fewer and fewer abortions in this world. And, again, I haven't spoken with anyone who disagrees with my position on that.
Personally, and this is isn't McCain-Palin policy …
But, personally, I would not choose to participate in that kind of contraception. It …
I don't think that it should necessarily be illegal. But we can go, again, round and round. And what the foundation I believe of this debate, of this discussion, even of your questions, is do you believe in the sanctity of life? Are you are you gonna side on the pro-life position or not when decisions are in front of you and you have to make them? Now, as a vice president, what positions would a vice-president have to take on the abortion issue? They're not legislating. A vice president does not make law.
Of course, it's the legislature, the law-making branch of our third, of our three branches of government …
…makes the laws.
Well, let's be practical about it and let's be realistic about a vice-president's role in this debate. I can personally share my views, which I don't apologize when I share my views of being pro-life. And, you know, I'll do that all day long if you want me to. But a vice-president does not make law. And a vice-president does not interpret the law either.
I will do all that I can personally to encourage that culture of life, to remind women that I believe with more empowerment, they - more and more women will realize that they are strong enough … and they are able to carry a child and still continue a career, still continue education opportunities, all with the goal being fewer and fewer abortions in this world.
Oh, I think it should be taught as an accepted principle. And, you know, I say that also as the daughter of a school teacher, a science teacher, who has really instilled in me a respect for science. It should be taught in our schools. And I won't ever deny that I see the hand of God in this beautiful creation that is Earth, especially coming from one of the most beautiful states in the Union and traveling around this country also in this last month. My goodness, just seeing, you know, the beautiful landscape of New Mexico recently. That was just breath taking and seeing the rolling hills in Virginia and all … the beauty that is this Earth, I see the hand of God in that. But that is not part of state policy or a local curriculum in a school district.
Science should be taught in science class.
Don't have a problem at all with kids debating all sides of theories, all sides of ideas that they ever - kids do it today whether … it's on paper, in a curriculum or not. Curriculums also are best left to the local school districts. Instead of Big Brother, federal government telling a district what they can and can't teach, I would like to see more control taken over by our school boards, by our local schools, and then state government at the most. But federal government, you know, kind of get out of some of this curriculum and let the locals decide what is best for their students.
Well, you're absolutely wrong, again, on the facts. My church, I don't have a church, I'm not a member of any church. I get to visit a couple of churches in Alaska when I'm home, including one, Wasilla Bible Church, and that's the one that you're talking about.
No, I think they …
The Wasilla Bible Church had a flyer that was part of a bulletin or something …
Well, it matters, though, because, Katie, when the media gets it wrong, it frustrates Americans who are just trying to get the facts and be able to make up their mind on, about a person's values. So it does matter …
But you are talking about, I think, a value here, what my position is on homosexuality and can you pray it away 'cause I think that was the title that was listed in that bulletin. And, you know, I don't know what prayers are worthy of being prayed. And I don't know what prayers are gonna be answered or not answered. But as for homosexuality, I am not going to judge Americans and the decisions that they make in their adult personal relationships.
I have, one of my absolute best friends for the last 30 years who happens to be gay. And I love her dearly. And she is not my "gay friend." She is one of my best friends who happens to have made a choice that isn't a choice that I have made. But I am not gonna judge people. And I love America where we are more tolerant than other countries are. And are more accepting of some of these choices that sometimes people want to believe reflects solely on an individual's values or not. Homosexuality, I am not gonna judge people.
I wish I had …
…time and the consistency to be a more regular attendee of a church but, no, have not.
Well, we're promising the reform. And we are mavericks. There's no doubt in anybody's mind now across America, who's paying attention to the presidential race here, that I am a Washington outsider. I mean, look at where you are. I'm a Washington outsider. I do not have those allegiances to the power brokers, to the lobbyists. We need someone like that in Washington, someone committed to the American people and implementing their will, not the power brokers' will.

Well, I would argue with the whole premise of that, that his mission is to not increase taxes. He's had 94 opportunities to either vote for a tax cut or not support tax increases. And 94 times, he's been on the other side of what I believe the majority of Americans want.


I certainly am. And of course the poster child for the earmarks was Alaska's, what people in the lower 48 refer to as the bridge to nowhere. First it was a bridge to community with an airport in southeast Alaska. But that was excessive. And an earmark -- an earmark like that, not even supported necessarily by the majority of Alaskans. We killed that earmark. We killed that project...

Right.

I was wearing a T-shirt with the Zip code of the community that was asking for that bridge. Not all the people in that community even were asking for a $400 million or $300 million bridge.

It has always been an embarrassment that abuse of the ear form -- earmark process has been accepted in Congress. And that's what John McCain has fought. And that's what I joined him in fighting. It's been an embarrassment, not just Alaska's projects. But McCain gives example after example after example. I mean, every state has their embarrassment. And, as I've said over and over, if Alaska wants that bridge, $300 million, $400 million dollars, over to that island with an airport, we'll find a way to build it ourselves. The rest of the country doesn't have to build that for us.

I was ...

I was for infrastructure being built in the state. And it's not inappropriate for a mayor or for a governor to request and to work with their Congress and their congressmen, their congresswomen, to plug into the federal budget along with every other state a share of the federal budget for infrastructure.

What I supported was the link between a community and its airport. And we have found that link now.

No, because Congress still allowed those dollars to come into Alaska. They did.

Transportation fund dollars still came into Alaska. It was our choice, Charlie, whether we were going to spend it on a bridge or not. And I said, thanks, but no thanks. We're not going to spend it on the bridge.

And now obviously, Charlie, with the federal government saying, no, the rest of the nation does not want to fund that project. You have a choice. You either read the writing on the wall and understand okay, yes, that, that project's going nowhere. And the state isn't willing to fund that project. So what good does it do to continue to support something that circumstances have so drastically changed? You call an audible, and you deal in reality, and you move on. And, Charlie, we killed the bridge to nowhere and that's the bottom line.

We have drastically, drastically reduced our earmark request since I came into office.

We sure are -- and this is what -- you go out and you ask any Alaskan this. This is what I've been telling Alaskans for these years that I've been in office, is no more.

Those requests, through our research divisions and fish and game and our wildlife departments and our universities, those research requests did come through that system, but wanting it to be in the light of day, not behind closed doors, with lobbyists making deals with Congress to stick things in there under the public radar. That's the abuse that we're going to stop. That's what John McCain has promised over and over for these years and that's what I'm joining him, also, saying, you're right, the abuse of earmarks, it's un-American, it's undemocratic, and it's not going to be accepted in a McCain-Palin administration. Earmark abuse will stop.


I think he's regretting not picking her now, I do. What, what determination, and grit, and even grace through some tough shots that were fired her way, she handled those well.


OK.

I think it should and I think that states should be able to decide that issue... I am pro-life. I do respect other people's opinion on this, also, and I think that a culture of life is best for America... What I want to do, when elected vice president, with John McCain, hopefully, be able to reach out and work with those who are on the other side of this issue, because I know that we can all agree on the need for and the desire for fewer abortions in America and greater support for adoption, for other alternatives that women can and should be empowered to embrace, to allow that culture of life. That's my personal opinion on this, Charlie.

That is my personal opinion.

My personal opinion is that abortion allowed if the life of the mother is endangered. Please understand me on this. I do understand McCain's position on this. I do understand others who are very passionate about this issue who have a differing.


You know, when you're running for office, your life is an open book and you do owe it to Americans to talk about your personal opinion, which may end up being different than what the policy in an administration would be. My personal opinion is we should not create human life, create an embryo and then destroy it for research, if there are other options out there... And thankfully, again, not only are there other options, but we're getting closer and closer to finding a tremendous amount more of options, like, as I mentioned, the adult stem cell research.

Oh, I don't -- I don't know, but I'm not one to judge and, you know, I'm from a family and from a community with many, many members of many diverse backgrounds and I'm not going to judge someone on whether they believe that homosexuality is a choice or genetic. I'm not going to judge them.

I do not and, you know, here again, life being an open book here, as a candidate, I'm a lifetime member of the NRA. I believe strongly in our Second Amendment rights. That's kind of inherent in the people of my state who rely on guns for not just self-protection, but also for our hunting and for sports, also. It's a part of a culture here in Alaska. I've just grown up with that.

Do I think that all of that gun violence, though, is caused by people pulling a trigger who would have followed any law anyway? No. You start banning guns and you start taking away guns from people who will use them responsibly and use them ethically.

You put more and more laws on guns and you start taking away a Second Amendment right, it's going to be, Charlie, the bad guys who have the guns, not those who are law-abiding citizens.


I don't know. I'm lucky to have been brought up in a family where gender has never been an issue. I'm a product of Title 9, also, where we had equality in schools that was just being ushered in with sports and with equal opportunity for education, all of my life.

I'm part of that generation, where that question is kind of irrelevant, because it's accepted. Of course you can be the vice president and you can raise a family.

I'm the governor and I'm raising a family. I've been a mayor and have raised a family. I've owned a business and we've raised a family.

What people have asked me when I was -- when I learned I was pregnant, "Gosh, how are you going to be the governor and have a baby in office, too," and I replied back then, as I would today, "I'll do it the same way the other governors have done it when they've either had baby in office or raised a family." Granted, they're men, but do it the same way that they do it.

Sure. And I understand what that struggle is, what those internal questions are. I've gone through the same thing over these 19 years from having my first born to today having a newborn.

In these 19 years, a lot of circumstances have changed. I stayed home with my son until he was seven years old, had just worked part-time, until I got into full-time employment again when he was seven. I had that choice then and I've had choices, of course, along the way.


I never banned a book, never desired to ban a book. When I became mayor in our town, it was the issue of: what if a parent came into our local public library and asked for a book to be taken off the shelf, wha's the policy? ...It kind of cracked me up seeing the list of books that I supposedly banned…one of them was 'Harry Potter!' It wasn't even written or published then.


Absolutely, there's nothing to hide in this. The personnel board is the appropriate agency or overseeing board to inquire as to whether anybody did anything wrong or not, but here's the issue with Troopergate and I'm glad that you're asking. The trooper in question here did conduct dangerous and illegal activities and our personal security detail when I was first elected had asked us very appropriately, are there any threats against you and your family. And I said, well, you know, ironically, yeah, it's a state trooper who's threatened to kill my dad and bring down me and once I got elected, his threats were he was going to bring down the governor and the governor's family, so it was very appropriate that we brought the concerns to personal security detail -- they asked us to bring it to the commissioner, which I did.

Yeah, back in '05 -- yeah.

We've said all along that … the personnel board is the appropriate agency or board to inquire -- our state statute says if there is a question about actions of the governor, lt. governor, or attorney general, you go to the personnel board. So we've said all along that that's appropriate …

No, they're not. In fact, they were all appointed by the prior administration, I had one reappointment on that board, they weren't all appointed by me. But, the issue that people are asking about -- first, they got it wrong when they say did I fire a trooper, because there was an issue back in '05 about him, as he was divorcing my sister. No, nobody fired the trooper, he's still a trooper to this day, he's out there. He had tasered his stepson, he had made those death threats, you know, there were a lot of concerns from not just my family, but from the public about this trooper's activities, and he's apologized for those since, I saw on the air the other day.

But, the issue is the commissioner, who was his boss, was he pressured to fire that trooper, that's the underlying issue here, right, Commissioner Monegan. Commissioner Monegan has said the governor never asked me to fire him, the governor's husband never asked me to fire him, and we never did. I never pressured him to hire or fire anybody. Why I replaced commissioner Monegan was after two years, of he working in my cabinet, as a political appointment, at will, exempt, recognizing after two years, he wasn't meeting the goals I wanted met in that area of public service, there were a lot of things that we were lacking, and a lot of goals weren't being met…

I wanted to bring somebody in with more vision and more energy to beef up public safety, hire more troopers, we increased the budget, yet still we had dozens and dozens of trooper positions vacant, we weren't reaching the goals on recruitment and retention of troopers, so that was one of the issues. I did recognize though that Commissioner Monegan could provide for the state some good public service in another area, so I did offer him another job, as the person in charge of the alcohol beverage control board, he chose not to transfer into that position, he chose then to leave state service, he didn't want that position, so the two issues have nothing to do with each other, the trooper's still a trooper today, Commissioner Monegan was offered another job, he turned that down, and now we're in the midst of a hiring practice for a new commissioner.

It amazes me still to think we cannot have very, very high standards for our troopers, for anybody in public service, certainly though, those who have a badge and carry a gun. But, I have always put in my commissioners hands their rights, their authority to hire, fire those that they need on their team to provide for better public service, I haven't micromanaged them. So, I didn't tell the guy to hire or fire anybody.

No, because I know that Todd, too, never pressured Commissioner Monegan. He did, very appropriately, though, bring up those concerns about a trooper who was making threats against the first family, and that is appropriate, in fact, you go to the department of law's web site, and it says right there in Q&A form on their Web site, it says, if you have an issue or a concern about an Alaskan state trooper, you bring that concern to the commissioner of the department of public safety. That's what Todd did, he appropriately did.

But another issue that I think has been lost through mainstream media reporting this, is that the trooper is still a trooper, Commissioner Monegan was replaced because he wasn't reaching the goals that our cabinet members were to reach, find efficiencies, put new vision, new energy into all of our departments. And, it's an issue that should be investigated by the personnel board, and they do -- it's been so politicized at this point, too, I think it's turned into quite the political issue.


And you're right, our economy is weak right now and we've got to strengthen it, and government can play an appropriate role in helping to strengthen the economy.

Our 6.1 percent unemployment rate is unacceptable, also, across our nation. We need to put government back on the side of the people and make sure that it is not government solely looked at for all the solutions, for one.

Government has got to get out of the way, in some respects, of the private sector, being able to create the jobs that we need, jobs that are going to allow for the families to be able to afford health care, to be able to afford their mortgages, to be able to afford college tuition for their kids. That's got to be the principal here, reform government, recognize that it's not government to be looked at to solve all the problems.

Taxes, of course, I think is one of the most important things that government can obviously control and to help with this issue.

We have got to make sure that we reform the oversight, also, of the agencies, including the quasi-government agencies, like Freddie and Fannie, those things that have created an atmosphere here in America where people are fearful of losing their homes.

People are looking at job loss. People are looking at unaffordable health care for their families. We have got to reform the oversight of these agencies that have such control over Americans' pocketbooks.

Reduce taxes, control spending, reform the oversight and the overseeing agencies and committees to make sure that America's dollars and investments are protected.

We're going to find efficiencies in every department. We have got to. There are some things that I think should be off the table. Veterans' programs, off the table. You know, we owe it to our veterans and that's the greatest manifestation that we can show in terms of support for our military, those who are in public service fighting for America. ...It's to make sure that our veterans are taken care of and the promises that we've made to them are fulfilled.

I am sure that there are efficiencies that are going to be found in all of these agencies. I'm confident in that.

We have certainly seen excess in agencies, though, and in -- when bureaucrats, when bureaucracy just gets kind of comfortable, going with the status-quo and not being challenged to find efficiencies and spend other people's money wisely ... then that's where we get into the situation that we are into today, and that is a tremendous growth of government, a huge debt, trillions of dollars of debt that we're passing on to my kids and your kids and your grandkids ... It's unacceptable.

I do, Charlie, and on January 20, when John McCain and I are sworn in, if we are so privileged to be elected to serve this country, we'll be ready. I'm ready.
I did not. I thought yes right off the bat, knowing that John McCain was looking for a reformer, a partner in this mission of his to change Washington, D.C. and to usher in positive change across our country.
I didn't hesitate, no.
I -- I answered him yes because I have the confidence in that readiness and knowing that you can't blink, you have to be wired in a way of being so committed to the mission, the mission that we're on, reform of this country and victory in the war, you can't blink. So I didn't blink then even when asked to run as his running mate.
Remember, again, what John McCain was looking for in a running mate -- someone who has a track record of reform, someone who doesn't just talk the talk, but has proven that she can walk the walk with reform.
But it is about reform of government and it's about putting government back on the side of the people, and that has much to do with foreign policy and national security issues.
We absolutely can, Charlie. But it's not just...
You're talking about...
You're talking about a small percentage of nonrenewable resources in petroleum and in hydrocarbon. What we need to start focusing on -- and that's what I've done as governor here, also, and it's via funding hundreds of millions of dollars towards alternative energy projects, conservation, weatherization, those things that Americans should be doing right now to wean ourselves off the conventional sources of energy.
We have called up National Guardsmen to help in other states who have gone in emergency status, we have assisted there. But, Charlie, there is an inherent link between energy and national security.
It is, but I want you to not lose sight of the fact that energy is a foundation of national security. It's that important. It's that significant. And when we are a country at war today, some reason for war is because these regimes use energy sources as a weapon. It makes absolutely no sense to embrace the status quo and just stay on the path that we are on now and not lead us, our country, toward that energy independence that will secure our nation.
Canada, Mexico, and then, yes, that trip, that was the trip of a lifetime to visit our troops in Kuwait and stop and visit our injured soldiers in Germany. That was the trip of a lifetime and it changed my life.
There in the state of Alaska, our international trade activities bring in many leaders of other countries.
Right.
Right, right.
I have not and I think if you go back in history and if you ask that question of many vice presidents, they may have the same answer that I just gave you. But, Charlie, again, we've got to remember what the desire is in this nation at this time. It is for no more politics as usual and somebody's big, fat resume maybe that shows decades and decades in that Washington establishment, where, yes, they've had opportunities to meet heads of state.
Sure.
First off, we're going to continue good relations with Saakashvili there. I was able to speak with him the other day and giving him my commitment, as John McCain's running mate, that we will be committed to Georgia. And we've got to keep an eye on Russia. For Russia to have exerted such pressure in terms of invading a smaller democratic country, unprovoked, is unacceptable and we have to keep...
I do believe unprovoked and we have got to keep our eyes on Russia, under the leadership there. I think it was unfortunate. That manifestation that we saw with that invasion of Georgia shows us some steps backwards that Russia has recently taken away from the race toward a more democratic nation with democratic ideals.
They're our next door neighbors and you can actually see Russia from land here in Alaska, from an island in Alaska.
Well, I'm giving you that perspective of how small our world is and how important it is that we work with our allies to keep good relation with all of these countries, especially Russia.
Ukraine, definitely, yes. Yes, and Georgia.
Well, you know, the Rose Revolution, the Orange Revolution, those actions have showed us that those democratic nations, I believe, deserve to be in NATO. Putin thinks otherwise. Obviously, he thinks otherwise, but...
Perhaps so. I mean, that is the agreement when you are a NATO ally, is if another country is attacked, you're going to be expected to be called upon and help. But NATO, I think, should include Ukraine, definitely, at this point and I think that we need to -- especially with new leadership coming in on January 20, being sworn on, on either ticket, we have got to make sure that we strengthen our allies, our ties with each one of those NATO members.
What I think is that smaller democratic countries that are invaded by a larger power is something for us to be vigilant against. We have got to be cognizant of what the consequences are if a larger power is able to take over smaller democratic countries. And we have got to be vigilant. We have got to show the support, in this case, for Georgia. The support that we can show is economic sanctions perhaps against Russia, if this is what it leads to.
Of course, I -- of course, I've been focused on the war. Of course I've been, as every American has been...
... since 9/11. And what we're doing in Iraq today, I believe, is the right thing, as we are standing shoulder-to-shoulder with the Iraqi people, fighting against Al Qaeda, fighting against Shia extremists and other terrorists who would seek to destroy Iraq's democracy, who would seek to destroy America and our allies.
The Iraqi people defending themselves, acting more as a sovereign, taking care of themselves in the democratic society that they are building and desiring, and then the American troops get to come home with honor and with victory. And this is as opposed to -- this is important, I think, for the American people to start realizing what the choices are in this election.
It's allowing them to grow.
We can't have an artificial time schedule, though. We cannot. We have to leave when the conditions on the ground mandate finally then the opportunity to leave and our commanders will tell us when we're ready to do that.
It was an honest answer for the question that day by a reporter asking me about Alaska "Business Monthly" issues, was my focus being on energy independence and security, those things that Alaska could supply to help make this country better and safer.
You know, I don't know if that was my exact quote.
But the reference there is a repeat of Abraham Lincoln's words when he said -- first, he suggested never presume to know what God's will is, and I would never presume to know God's will or to speak God's words.
I believe that there is a plan for this world and that plan for this world is for good. I believe that there is great hope and great potential for every country to be able to live and be protected with inalienable rights that I believe are God-given, Charlie, and I believe that those are the rights to life and liberty and the pursuit of happiness. That, in my world view, is a grand -- the grand plan.
I don't know if the task is from God, Charlie. What I know is that my son has made a decision. I am so proud of his independent and strong decision he has made, what he decided to do and serving for the right reasons and serving something greater than himself and not choosing a real easy path where he could be more comfortable and certainly safer.
I believe that under the leadership of Ahmadinejad, nuclear weapons in the hands of his government are extremely dangerous to everyone on this globe, yes.
No, no. I agree with John McCain that nuclear weapons in the hands of those who would seek to destroy our allies, in this case, we're talking about Israel, we're talking about Ahmadinejad's comment about Israel being the "stinking corpse, should be wiped off the face of the earth," that's atrocious. That's unacceptable.
We have got to make sure that these weapons of mass destruction, that nuclear weapons are not given to those hands of Ahmadinejad, not that he would use them, but that he would allow terrorists to be able to use them. So we have got to put the pressure on Iran and we have got to count on our allies to help us, diplomatic pressure.
We need to pursue those and we need to implement those. We cannot back off. We cannot just concede that, oh, gee, maybe they're going to have nuclear weapons, what can we do about it. No way, not Americans. We do not have to stand for that. What I would like to see, Charlie, is for America to recapture -- in the days of Reagan, remember, we had captured this -- the exceptionalism of America, America being able to be counted on with our allies and then, you know, that's got to be mutual, though, but we need to be able to count on them, also.
Well, first, we are friends with Israel and I don't think that we should second guess the measures that Israel has to take to defend themselves and for their security.
I don't think we can second guess what Israel has to do to secure its nation.
We cannot second guess the steps that Israel has to take to defend itself. Charlie though, the premise there, it sounds to me, is that your belief, perhaps, just based on this question, is that we would ever get to this point. This is why it is so important that American military and our intelligence is better than anybody else's on this globe, so that we can help with our allies and we can put pressure on other nations to make sure we never see a scenario like that.
We've got to follow through on sanctions and we have got to be strong...
... and we have got -- and we have got to win in the war surrounding Iran, also, and we have got to not accept Ahmadinejad's pressure that he exerts on other democratic nations. It is unacceptable. Here's what scares me. Again, let me go back to the democratic ticket, because the issue here, again, is choices that Americans have in this presidential race. OK? The other ticket starts talking about meeting with Ahmadinejad or other leaders that are volatile, that are dangerous, with no preconditions.
You know, there is a very small percentage of Islamic believers who are extreme and they are violent and they do not believe in American ideals, and they attacked us and now we are at a point here seven years later, on the anniversary, in this post-9/11 world, where we're able to commit to never again.
That's a great question. What it leads me to believe is that too many people have no hope. They don't see opportunity for anything but death and darkness and following and evil regimes. It's very unfortunate. It's going to take perhaps generations to get even a mindset change on this, but it's important that we take the steps towards peace and towards providing opportunity and hope for these young men especially who don't see opportunity for family or career or anything else.
You know, another good question, Charlie, because in some regions of the world, unfortunately, they don't look favorably upon Americans and I think in my job as vice president, I can and I will do all that is possible to restore our reputation as...
... that country...
... of exceptionalism. We need to continue to be a generous nation and we are. Look what we're doing in Africa with the humanitarian efforts, not necessarily just government efforts, but enabling and embracing the private sector and charitable organizations to be in Africa to help with the poverty, to end corruption there, to help with the disease, to eradicate disease in Africa. America needs to keep doing that. We need to do this with a bipartisan effort.
In what respect, Charlie?
His world view.
I believe that what President Bush has attempted to do is rid this world of Islamic extremism, terrorists who are hell bent on destroying our nation. There have been blunders along the way, though. There have been mistakes made. And with new leadership, and that's the beauty of American elections, of course, and democracy, is with new leadership comes opportunity to do things better.
I agree that a president's job, when they swear in their oath to uphold our Constitution, their top priority is to defend the United States of America. I know that John McCain will do that and I, as his vice president, if we are blessed with that vote of the American people and are elected to serve and are sworn in on January 20, that will be our top priority -- is to defend the American people.
Charlie, if there is legitimate and enough intelligence that tells us that a strike is imminent against American people, we have every right to defend our country. In fact, the president has the obligation, the duty to defend, and that's what a McCain-Palin administration would do.
I think the Pakistani government, especially now under Zardari, they're going to welcome our assistance as we work on a mutually beneficial mission here in trying to get Osama Bin Laden out of their mountains. I think that that's going to be one of the things that we work on with the Pakistani government.
This brings us right back to how important it is to win in Afghanistan, to make sure that the terrorist groups are not growing there. We can't afford to lose in Iraq and we can't afford to lose in Afghanistan.
We do need more troops in Afghanistan, we do...
In order to stop Islamic extremists, those terrorists who would seek to destroy America and our allies, we must do whatever it takes and we must not blink, Charlie, in making those tough decisions of where we go and even who we target.
I believe that America has to exercise all options in order to stop the terrorists who are hell bent on destroying America and our allies. We have got to have all options out there on the table. Military strike has got to be a last option. But where we are today, in a very dangerous and volatile world, all options have got to be on the table.
Thank you so much. Hope you get to travel around Alaska.
You know, I don't know what the percentage of it is, but a lot of it is underground. Now, our natural gas pipeline that we're going to be building, most of it will be underground. What we've done though to start really making sure that the oil companies aren't skimping on the infrastructure improvements that have to take place in this pipeline because it is 30 years old and through atrophy, you know, there is going to be some corrosion, there's going to be potentially some damages. When I got into office I formed a petroleum integrity office where all we do is inspect the production, the pipeline flow making sure that there are no adverse environmental impacts.
BP has had some problems with corrosion and they've been shutting down once in a while, so we do have oversight that we have really ramped up so that we can prove to the rest of the nation we're going to do this responsibly, we're going to do it safely, so that more in -- especially in Congress -- will allow more lands to be unlocked in this state so that we can start producing more.
Pretty much along the same path yeah. There's some variation in some parts along this route. In fact we have two different projects that are under way at this point. The 40 - nearly 40 billion dollar natural gas pipeline that our legislature just recently approved. It's going to be the largest private sector infrastructure project in North America's history.
Well, you know I haven't made a lot of friends in the oil industry, if you will, because we have said they have leases that they have held onto here in the state of Alaska, some leases for decades, and they still haven't produced in some of the fields that are rich and ripe for production. But they have a duty to develop, they have provisions in their leases, in the contracts that they signed years ago, that when it was economic, when the price was right, they'd be developing. Now the price is right, it is time to develop.
Even more than that.
Well, not anymore. And we did have some rogue legislators who are serving prison time right now, Charlie, for having accepted bribes from oil service company executives. Those executives having plead guilty to corrupting lawmakers, we've broken that and that, I believe, is the reason that I got elected governor, is because I promised that we weren't going to put up with that anymore.
I believe that man's activities certainly can be contributing to the issue of global warming, climate change. Here in Alaska, the only arctic state in our union of course, we see the effects of climate change more so than any other area with ice pack melting.
The debate on that even really has evolved into—okay, here's where we are now. Scientists do show us that there are changes in climate. Things are getting warmer. Now what do we do about it? John McCain and I are going to be working on what we do about it.
That's why I'm attributing some of man's activities to potentially causing some of the changes in the climate right now.
I think you are a cynic because show me where I've said there's absolute proof that nothing that man has ever conducted or engaged in has had any effect or no effect on climate change. I have not said that. I have said that, my belief is there is a cyclical nature of our planet -- warming trends, cooling trends -- I'm not going to argue scientists because I believe in science and have such a great respect for what they are telling us. I'm not going to disagree with the point that they make that man's activities can be attributed to changes.
I sure do.
I'm going to keep working on that one with him. ANWR of course is two thousand acre swath of land in the middle of about a 20 million swath of land. Two thousand acres that we're asking the Feds to unlock so that there can be exploration and development and that can too help lead us to that path of energy independence. .But it's not just ANWR, it's offshore drilling also. Off-shore is where really the bulk of that gas supply especially and oil supply. And John McCain in a sign of a statesmanship pragmatic, the pragmatism also that encompasses this candidate -- I so respect his thinking there. He's really evolved into understanding why off-shore is so important and that's where the bulk of the resource is.
That's exactly right. We'll agree to disagree but I'm going to keep pushing that and I think eventually we're all going to come together on that one.
Well first maybe Tillerson doesn't believe that we'll ever become energy independent in terms of only using domestic supplies of energy because Exxon has huge developments in foreign countries where they're making world record, mind-boggling profits every quarter billions of dollars in profits. So maybe we're not on the same page on whether the drive should be towards energy independence, domestic supplies of energy -- I am a strong proponent of that though. American resources with American ingenuity and new technology brought to you by Americans workers—that's what we're going to be working for in the McCain-Palin administration.
No, we should not. We should supply more into these hungry markets but what Americans need to do is -- we gotta stop acting so spoiled when we talk about these nonrenewable sources of energy that we have been so spoiled in utilizing and not really caring so much that once they're gone, they're gone. We have to be cognizant of the need to conserve. So that's going to be a part of our long term energy plan also, the conservation and the weatherization too. That's what we're doing up here in Alaska. We're funding a lot with state revenues allowing people here in Alaska to conserve and weatherize their homes and their vehicles so we quit wasting so much. That's going to lead us to that energy independence also—once we quit utilizing so much of it.
And you're right, our economy is weak right now and we've got to strengthen it, and government can play an appropriate role to strengthen the economy. Our 6.1 percent unemployment rate is unacceptable, also, across our nation. We need to put government back on the side of the people and make sure that it is not government solely looked at for all the solutions, for one.
No -- well, we had a two percent sales tax and when people came to local government and said, "We want a sports arena here," I said, "That's fine and I want a sports arena, also, but we're going to have to pay for it." So we're going to have to prioritize for that project and you're going to have to vote yourselves in to half a penny sales tax to pay for it, the bond that would fund the sports arena. That's how we paid for that. So eliminating...
A $13 million sports arena that we bonded for, but, see, we put government on the side of the people by asking them if that's what they wanted. It was a question on the ballot and they got to vote yes or no. They were willing to incur that to pay out the bond to build it, an amenity that they had desired. After talking about a sports arena in Wasilla for 30 years, I got into office and I said, "You know, let's quit talking about it. Let's take some action and let's ask voters if this really is such a high priority that they'd be willing to pay for it.
We have got to make sure that we reform the oversight, also, of the agencies, including the quasi government agencies, like Freddie and Fannie, those things that have created an atmosphere here in America where people are fearful of losing their homes.
Reduce taxes, control spending, reform the oversight and the overseeing agencies and committees to make sure that America's dollars and investments are protected. And when these agencies and financial institutions are spending other people's moneys, government can play an appropriate role there in the stringent oversight so Americans can trust those investments.
We're going to find efficiencies in every department. We have got to. There are some things that I think should be off the table. Veterans' programs, off the table. You know, we owe it to our veterans and that's the greatest manifestation that we can show in terms of support for our military, those who are in public service fighting for America. It's to make sure that our veterans are taken care of and the promises that we've made to them are fulfilled.
Veterans' benefits should be off the table.
We need to -- we need to get into every department, every division, and that's what's going to be the task of cabinet members and then the next level of bureaucracy and the next level of bureaucracy. We're going to count on the public officials to join our team. The mission is reform. We're not going to just embrace the status quo and just assume that, ah, it's really difficult to do.
I am sure that there are efficiencies that are going to be found in all of these agencies. I'm confident in that.
We have certainly seen excess in agencies, though, and in -- when bureaucrats -- when bureaucracy just gets kind of comfortable, going with the status quo and not being challenged to find efficiencies and spend other people's money wisely, then that's where we get into the situation that we are into today, and that is a tremendous growth of government, a huge debt, trillions of dollars of debt that we're passing on to my kids and your kids and your grandkids -- It's unacceptable. And it's time for change there. And that's what the American people are asking for.
Well, we're promising the reform. And we are mavericks. And that's why I'm very thankful to have been chosen to team up with somebody who has been a proven maverick also. An independent streak in both of us, Charlie, both John McCain and in me that's not going to let obsessive partisanship get in the way.
Well, I would argue with the whole premise of that, that his mission is to not increase taxes. He's had 94 opportunities to either vote for a tax cut or not support tax increases. And 94 times, he's been on the other side of what I believe the majority of Americans want. And that is a reduction in taxes -- allowing Americans to keep more of what they earn, allowing them to invest for their priorities, for their families' priorities.
 Well, I wasn't a fan of the Bill Clinton tax plan either.
We need to create more jobs. There again, though, it's got to be the private sector creating those jobs. Federal government, state government, local government, we need to provide the infrastructure tools, those things that individuals and small businesses can't do individually, but as a whole, government can do. Roads, water, sewer, education, public safety -- those basics. Few basics, and we do those few things very, very good.
I certainly am. And of course the poster child for the earmarks was Alaska's, what people in the lower 48 refer to as, the bridge to nowhere.
First it was a bridge to community with an airport in southeast Alaska. But that was excessive. And an earmark -- an earmark like that, not even supported necessarily by the majority of Alaskans. We killed that earmark. We killed that project. And, as I've said over and over, if Alaska wants that bridge, $300 million, $400 million, over to that island with an airport, we'll find a way to build it ourselves. The rest of the country doesn't have to build that for us.
I don't think he's ever said every single earmark.
He has said the pork barrel, overstuffed earmark bill that comes in front of him, he'll veto. And I absolutely support him on that. What has to stop, Charlie, the reform in this arena that has to take place, is the abuse of the earmark process. And Alaska here too, unfortunately, has been made famous by the abuses there. Those 11th hour, behind-closed-doors, secret bills struck to put an earmark in the federal budget without public scrutiny, unacceptable.
Right.
I was wearing a t-shirt with the zip code of the community that was asking for that bridge. Not all the people in that community even were asking for a $400 million or $300 million bridge.
It has always been an embarrassment that abuse of the ear form -- earmark process has been accepted in Congress. And that's what John McCain has fought. And that's what I joined him in fighting. It's been an embarrassment, not just Alaska's projects. But McCain gives example after example after example. I mean, every state has their embarrassment.
 I was...
I was for infrastructure being built in the state. And it's not inappropriate for a mayor or for a governor to request and to work with their Congress and their congressmen, their congresswomen, to plug into the federal budget along with every other state a share of the federal budget for infrastructure.
What I supported was the link between a community and its airport. And we have found that link now. And that's better ferry...
No.
It's better ferry service. I'm telling you where we are today.
Today we have found that solution. And it's a strong and reliable ferry service back and forth. They had had that ferry service before. Some thought it would be time for a bridge to be built.
No, because Congress still allowed those dollars to come into Alaska. They did.
Transportation fund dollars still came into Alaska. It was our choice, Charlie, whether we were going to spend it on a bridge or not. And I said, thanks, but no thanks. We're not going to spend it on the bridge.
It certainly is. Those are infrastructure dollars that a local -- a state government and a local government needs to figure out how to best prioritize those federal funds. We best prioritized those in strengthening existing bridges across our state. We strengthened our infrastructure by paving more roads and building new roads, and building up the water and sewer lines throughout our communities, some communities in Alaska that don't even have water or sewer lines.
We have drastically, drastically reduced our earmark request since I came into office.
We sure are -- and this is what -- you go out and you ask any Alaskan this. This is what I've been telling Alaskans for these years that I've been in office, is no more.
Those requests, through our research divisions and fish and game and our wildlife departments and our universities, those research requests did come through that system, but wanting it to be in the light of day, not behind closed doors, with lobbyists making deals with Congress to stick things in there under the public radar.
We did. We paid $30,000 for a lobbyist who was in D.C., because we're thousands and thousands of miles away from D.C. It would have cost us a lot more to be traveling back and forth from this small community. You know what he was working on for us, also? Water, sewer system projects, those things that were part of a federal government's appropriate role, also, in sharing with the infrastructure needs of a local community of a state.
OK.
I think it should and I think that states should be able to decide that issue.
It is.
It is a very critical, very sensitive and a personal issue, also, for so many women and men across this nation. I am pro-life. I do respect other people's opinion on this, also, and I think that a culture of life is best for America.
That is my personal opinion.
My personal opinion is that abortion allowed if the life of the mother is endangered. Please understand me on this. I do understand McCain's position on this. I do understand others who are very passionate about this issue who have a differing view.
I think it's very important that we beef up and support our National Institute of Health and starting funding for more research so that all these, at this time, incurable diseases we can start curing. We're seeing good progress and we've got great encouragement with researchers finding adult stem cell, research that's providing productive towards curing these diseases.
I agree -- we appreciate that you're asking me the question, because I do want to tell Americans what my personal opinion is.
And I gave you my personal opinion. Creating an embryo and then destroying it is -- that is not something that personally I support.
Oh, I don't -- I don't know, but I'm not one to judge and, you know, I'm from a family and from a community with many, many members of many diverse backgrounds and I'm not going to judge someone on whether they believe that homosexuality is a choice or genetic. I'm not going to judge them.
I do not and, you know, here again, life being an open book here, as a candidate, I'm a lifetime member of the NRA. I believe strongly in our Second Amendment rights. That's kind of inherent in the people of my state who rely on guns for not just self-protection, but also for our hunting and for sports, also. It's a part of a culture here in Alaska. I've just grown up with that.
Do think that all of that gun violence, though, is caused by people pulling a trigger who would have followed any law anyway? No. You start banning guns and you start taking away guns from people who will use them responsibly and use them ethically.
I don't know. I'm lucky to have been brought up in a family where gender has never been an issue. I'm a product of Title 9, also, where we had equality in schools that was just being ushered in with sports and with equal opportunity for education, all of my life.
Sure. And I understand what that struggle is, what those internal questions are. I've gone through the same thing over these 19 years from having my first born to today having a newborn.
Thank you so much. I'm glad you came.
Mr. Chairman, delegates, and fellow citizens: I am honored to be considered for the nomination for vice president of the United States.

I accept the call to help our nominee for president to serve and defend America.

I accept the challenge of a tough fight in this election against confident opponents at a crucial hour for our country.

And I accept the privilege of serving with a man who has come through much harder missions ... and met far graver challenges and knows how tough fights are won — the next president of the United States, John S. McCain.

It was just a year ago when all the experts in Washington counted out our nominee because he refused to hedge his commitment to the security of the country he loves.

With their usual certitude, they told us that all was lost — there was no hope for this candidate who said that he would rather lose an election than see his country lose a war.

But the pollsters and pundits overlooked just one thing when they wrote him off.

They overlooked the caliber of the man himself — the determination, resolve, and sheer guts of Sen. John McCain. The voters knew better.

And maybe that's because they realize there is a time for politics and a time for leadership ... a time to campaign and a time to put our country first.

Our nominee for president is a true profile in courage, and people like that are hard to come by.

He's a man who wore the uniform of this country for 22 years and refused to break faith with those troops in Iraq who have now brought victory within sight.

And as the mother of one of those troops, that is exactly the kind of man I want as commander in chief. I'm just one of many moms who'll say an extra prayer each night for our sons and daughters going into harm's way.

Our son Track is 19.

And one week from tomorrow — Sept. 11 — he'll deploy to Iraq with the Army infantry in the service of his country.

My nephew Kasey also enlisted and serves on a carrier in the Persian Gulf.

My family is proud of both of them and of all the fine men and women serving the country in uniform. Track is the eldest of our five children.

In our family, it's two boys and three girls in between — my strong and kind-hearted daughters, Bristol, Willow and Piper.

And in April, my husband, Todd, and I welcomed our littlest one into the world, a perfectly beautiful baby boy named Trig. From the inside, no family ever seems typical.

That's how it is with us.

Our family has the same ups and downs as any other — the same challenges and the same joys.

Sometimes even the greatest joys bring challenge.

And children with special needs inspire a special love.

To the families of special-needs children all across this country, I have a message: For years, you sought to make America a more welcoming place for your sons and daughters.

I pledge to you that if we are elected, you will have a friend and advocate in the White House. Todd is a story all by himself.

He's a lifelong commercial fisherman ... a production operator in the oil fields of Alaska's North Slope ... a proud member of the United Steel Workers Union ... and world champion snow machine racer.

Throw in his Yup'ik Eskimo ancestry, and it all makes for quite a package.

We met in high school, and two decades and five children later he's still my guy. My mom and dad both worked at the elementary school in our small town.

And among the many things I owe them is one simple lesson: that this is America, and every woman can walk through every door of opportunity.

My parents are here tonight, and I am so proud to be the daughter of Chuck and Sally Heath. Long ago, a young farmer and haberdasher from Missouri followed an unlikely path to the vice presidency.

A writer observed: "We grow good people in our small towns, with honesty, sincerity, and dignity." I know just the kind of people that writer had in mind when he praised Harry Truman.

I grew up with those people.

They are the ones who do some of the hardest work in America who grow our food, run our factories and fight our wars.

They love their country, in good times and bad, and they're always proud of America. I had the privilege of living most of my life in a small town.

I was just your average hockey mom and signed up for the PTA because I wanted to make my kids' public education better.

When I ran for City Council, I didn't need focus groups and voter profiles because I knew those voters, and knew their families, too.

Before I became governor of the great state of Alaska, I was mayor of my hometown.

And since our opponents in this presidential election seem to look down on that experience, let me explain to them what the job involves.

I guess a small-town mayor is sort of like a "community organizer," except that you have actual responsibilities. I might add that in small towns, we don't quite know what to make of a candidate who lavishes praise on working people when they are listening, and then talks about how bitterly they cling to their religion and guns when those people aren't listening.

We tend to prefer candidates who don't talk about us one way in Scranton and another way in San Francisco.

As for my running mate, you can be certain that wherever he goes, and whoever is listening, John McCain is the same man. I'm not a member of the permanent political establishment. And I've learned quickly, these past few days, that if you're not a member in good standing of the Washington elite, then some in the media consider a candidate unqualified for that reason alone.

But here's a little news flash for all those reporters and commentators: I'm not going to Washington to seek their good opinion. I'm going to Washington to serve the people of this country. Americans expect us to go to Washington for the right reasons, and not just to mingle with the right people.

Politics isn't just a game of clashing parties and competing interests.

The right reason is to challenge the status quo, to serve the common good, and to leave this nation better than we found it.

No one expects us to agree on everything.

But we are expected to govern with integrity, good will, clear convictions, and ... a servant's heart.

I pledge to all Americans that I will carry myself in this spirit as vice president of the United States. This was the spirit that brought me to the governor's office, when I took on the old politics as usual in Juneau ... when I stood up to the special interests, the lobbyists, big oil companies, and the good-ol' boys network.

Sudden and relentless reform never sits well with entrenched interests and power brokers. That's why true reform is so hard to achieve.

But with the support of the citizens of Alaska, we shook things up.

And in short order we put the government of our state back on the side of the people.

I came to office promising major ethics reform, to end the culture of self-dealing. And today, that ethics reform is the law.

While I was at it, I got rid of a few things in the governor's office that I didn't believe our citizens should have to pay for.

That luxury jet was over the top. I put it on eBay.

I also drive myself to work.

And I thought we could muddle through without the governor's personal chef — although I've got to admit that sometimes my kids sure miss her. I came to office promising to control spending — by request if possible and by veto if necessary.

Sen. McCain also promises to use the power of veto in defense of the public interest — and as a chief executive, I can assure you it works.

Our state budget is under control.

We have a surplus.

And I have protected the taxpayers by vetoing wasteful spending: nearly half a billion dollars in vetoes.

I suspended the state fuel tax and championed reform to end the abuses of earmark spending by Congress.

I told the Congress "thanks, but no thanks," for that Bridge to Nowhere.

If our state wanted a bridge, we'd build it ourselves. When oil and gas prices went up dramatically, and filled up the state treasury, I sent a large share of that revenue back where it belonged — directly to the people of Alaska.

And despite fierce opposition from oil company lobbyists, who kind of liked things the way they were, we broke their monopoly on power and resources.

As governor, I insisted on competition and basic fairness to end their control of our state and return it to the people.

I fought to bring about the largest private-sector infrastructure project in North American history.

And when that deal was struck, we began a nearly 40 billion-dollar natural gas pipeline to help lead America to energy independence.

That pipeline, when the last section is laid and its valves are opened, will lead America one step farther away from dependence on dangerous foreign powers that do not have our interests at heart.

The stakes for our nation could not be higher.

When a hurricane strikes in the Gulf of Mexico, this country should not be so dependent on imported oil that we are forced to draw from our Strategic Petroleum Reserve.

And families cannot throw away more and more of their paychecks on gas and heating oil.

With Russia wanting to control a vital pipeline in the Caucasus, and to divide and intimidate our European allies by using energy as a weapon, we cannot leave ourselves at the mercy of foreign suppliers.

To confront the threat that Iran might seek to cut off nearly a fifth of world energy supplies ... or that terrorists might strike again at the Abqaiq facility in Saudi Arabia ... or that Venezuela might shut off its oil deliveries ... we Americans need to produce more of our own oil and gas.

And take it from a gal who knows the North Slope of Alaska: We've got lots of both.

Our opponents say, again and again, that drilling will not solve all of America's energy problems — as if we all didn't know that already.

But the fact that drilling won't solve every problem is no excuse to do nothing at all.

Starting in January, in a McCain-Palin administration, we're going to lay more pipelines ... build more nuclear plants ... create jobs with clean coal ... and move forward on solar, wind, geothermal and other alternative sources.

We need American energy resources, brought to you by American ingenuity, and produced by American workers. I've noticed a pattern with our opponent.

Maybe you have, too.

We've all heard his dramatic speeches before devoted followers.

And there is much to like and admire about our opponent.

But listening to him speak, it's easy to forget that this is a man who has authored two memoirs but not a single major law or reform — not even in the state Senate.

This is a man who can give an entire speech about the wars America is fighting and never use the word "victory" except when he's talking about his own campaign. But when the cloud of rhetoric has passed ... when the roar of the crowd fades away ... when the stadium lights go out, and those Styrofoam Greek columns are hauled back to some studio lot — what exactly is our opponent's plan? What does he actually seek to accomplish, after he's done turning back the waters and healing the planet? The answer is to make government bigger ... take more of your money ... give you more orders from Washington ... and to reduce the strength of America in a dangerous world. America needs more energy ... our opponent is against producing it.

Victory in Iraq is finally in sight ... he wants to forfeit.

Terrorist states are seeking nuclear weapons without delay ... he wants to meet them without preconditions.

Al-Qaida terrorists still plot to inflict catastrophic harm on America ... he's worried that someone won't read them their rights? Government is too big ... he wants to grow it.

Congress spends too much ... he promises more.

Taxes are too high ... he wants to raise them. His tax increases are the fine print in his economic plan, and let me be specific.

The Democratic nominee for president supports plans to raise income taxes ... raise payroll taxes ... raise investment income taxes ... raise the death tax ... raise business taxes ... and increase the tax burden on the American people by hundreds of billions of dollars. My sister Heather and her husband have just built a service station that's now opened for business — like millions of others who run small businesses.

How are they going to be any better off if taxes go up? Or maybe you're trying to keep your job at a plant in Michigan or Ohio ... or create jobs with clean coal from Pennsylvania or West Virginia ... or keep a small farm in the family right here in Minnesota.

How are you going to be better off if our opponent adds a massive tax burden to the American economy? Here's how I look at the choice Americans face in this election.

In politics, there are some candidates who use change to promote their careers.

And then there are those, like John McCain, who use their careers to promote change.

They're the ones whose names appear on laws and landmark reforms, not just on buttons and banners, or on self-designed presidential seals.

Among politicians, there is the idealism of high-flown speechmaking, in which crowds are stirringly summoned to support great things.

And then there is the idealism of those leaders, like John McCain, who actually do great things. They're the ones who are good for more than talk ... the ones we have always been able to count on to serve and defend America. Sen. McCain's record of actual achievement and reform helps explain why so many special interests, lobbyists and comfortable committee chairmen in Congress have fought the prospect of a McCain presidency — from the primary election of 2000 to this very day.

Our nominee doesn't run with the Washington herd.

He's a man who's there to serve his country, and not just his party.

A leader who's not looking for a fight, but is not afraid of one either. Harry Reid, the majority leader of the current do-nothing Senate, not long ago summed up his feelings about our nominee.

He said, quote, "I can't stand John McCain." Ladies and gentlemen, perhaps no accolade we hear this week is better proof that we've chosen the right man. Clearly what the majority leader was driving at is that he can't stand up to John McCain. That is only one more reason to take the maverick of the Senate and put him in the White House. My fellow citizens, the American presidency is not supposed to be a journey of "personal discovery." This world of threats and dangers is not just a community, and it doesn't just need an organizer.

And though both Sen. Obama and Sen. Biden have been going on lately about how they are always, quote, "fighting for you," let us face the matter squarely.

There is only one man in this election who has ever really fought for you ... in places where winning means survival and defeat means death ... and that man is John McCain. In our day, politicians have readily shared much lesser tales of adversity than the nightmare world in which this man, and others equally brave, served and suffered for their country.

It's a long way from the fear and pain and squalor of a 6-by-4 cell in Hanoi to the Oval Office.

But if Sen. McCain is elected president, that is the journey he will have made.

It's the journey of an upright and honorable man — the kind of fellow whose name you will find on war memorials in small towns across this country, only he was among those who came home.

To the most powerful office on Earth, he would bring the compassion that comes from having once been powerless ... the wisdom that comes even to the captives, by the grace of God ... the special confidence of those who have seen evil, and seen how evil is overcome. A fellow prisoner of war, a man named Tom Moe of Lancaster, Ohio, recalls looking through a pinhole in his cell door as Lt. Cmdr. John McCain was led down the hallway, by the guards, day after day.

As the story is told, "When McCain shuffled back from torturous interrogations, he would turn toward Moe's door and flash a grin and thumbs up" — as if to say, "We're going to pull through this." My fellow Americans, that is the kind of man America needs to see us through these next four years.

For a season, a gifted speaker can inspire with his words.

For a lifetime, John McCain has inspired with his deeds.

If character is the measure in this election ... and hope the theme ... and change the goal we share, then I ask you to join our cause. Join our cause and help America elect a great man as the next president of the United States.

Thank you all, and may God bless America."

Thank you so much.
I think the two are and should be even more so merging because the Tea Party movement is quite reflective of what the GOP — the points in the platform are supposed to be about — limited government, and more freedom, more respect for equality.
Because both major parties, the D's and the R's, have both kind of lost their way in some respects. The GOP has some very strong planks in the platform that build a platform that I believe is best to build a strong, safe, prosperous nation.
No. I would hope that the Tea Party — the Tea Partiers don't believe that they need some kind of well-oiled machine, some kind of replicate of the GOP or the Democrat Party, and instead, they remain a movement of the people, uprising and saying, "Listen to us. We have some commonsense solutions that we want our politicians to consider and to implement."
Well, because...
... because he's a...
... he's a federalist and he wants the states to have more say in — as we respect the Tenth Amendment in our Constitution. He wants the states to have more say in a lot of the issues.
He has some misguided decisions that he is making that he is expecting us to just kind of sit down and shut up and accept, and many of us are not going to sit down and shut up. We're going to say, No, we do not like this..."
In a general — just kind of his general persona, I think, that he has, when he's up there at a — I'll call it a lectern — when he is up there and he is telling us, basically, "I know best. My people here in the White House know best, and we are going to tell you that yes, you do want this essentially nationalized health care system." And we're saying, "No, we don't."
Yes.
Our opponent is someone who sees America as imperfect enough to pal around with terrorists who targeted their own country.
No, I don't, because of associations with Bill Ayers and with others. He never really has, I think, adequately addressed why in the world he would have a relationship with a type of person like that, who had such disdain for America that he would want to bomb, harm, hurt, kill Americans.
So the things that he has...
... done right now as president...
... in protecting the country — more power to him. We appreciate that he kind of went there fully with the commanders on the ground asking for more reinforcements in Afghanistan — couldn't get there all the way with these guys, but kind of went there. Good. More power to you.
Very happy to hear about that minuscule decrease there in the unemployment rate, but better that than a growing unemployment rate.
Well, I believe that these babies in our womb have the right to life, and that's what I stand on. And I did — I honestly, candidly talked about that in my book when I said, "I can understand the sensitivity of the issue, because I've been there. I've understood why that fleeting thought would enter a woman's mind."
Of course I can...
... understand, and that's why I wrote that.
And that's why I...
... wrote about it as saying that I understand why those thoughts would enter their mind.
Yes.
Hell, no! Thankfully, I didn't. What we did was we won, because the state today — it's not spending millions of dollars to fight these frivolous lawsuits and frivolous ethics charges, ethics charges like me wearing a jacket with a snow machine logo on it and getting charged for an unethical act for doing such a thing — little, piddly, petty things like that that were costing our state millions of dollars and costing me and my administration, my staff members, about 80 percent of our time fighting those things.
"You're not going to..."
I don't think that they...
I don't think that they think I'm — look it, I'm sitting here talking to Chris Wallace today. I think some of them are going, "Dang, we thought she'd sit down and shut up after we tried to do to her what we tried."
And now we get to talk about energy independence. Now we get to talk about those things that are important...
... to Alaskans and our country.
Yes.
It's a big difference between just getting political potshots fired your way. I can handle those. I get those — shoot, I got more of those this morning. So what? That doesn't matter.
Absolutely. And you know, there are so few people in the political world and the media world that someone like me — that we can trust. My husband is — he's my soulmate. He's my best friend. He's my number one adviser. I'm going to bounce things off Todd — nothing confidential that couldn't be shared with others out there in the public.
He certainly had the right to express his opinion on things, too.
No, what NBC...
He was forwarding on e-mails. And here's another thing. Todd and I being, in some cases, thousands of miles apart — if I e- mailed him about something — say I was outside traveling. Todd's home. He's there at a desktop and I'm telling Todd, "Hey, Todd, print this off for me. I'm going to grab it on my way home," because I work off a BlackBerry constantly. For practical reasons, it helped, too.
All right.
Sure. He should, and I think Rahm Emanuel should step down, too. I think these guys are giving our president wrong advice. And for a variety of reasons I would...
... like to see them step down.
Yes.
Yes. Yeah, because of the way that we are treating these terrorists, allowing them our U.S. constitutional protections when they do not deserve them.
I don't think so right now. I was surprised that the president spent time on that in his State of the Union speech when he only spent about 9 percent of his time in the State of the Union on national security issues.
Yeah.
Oh, you know...
... Rahm Emanuel — I think he has some indecent and insensitive ways of being, including his language and as I said for a variety of reasons giving the president poor advice, I think, and his heavy-handedness. I think he should step down.
He was hysterical in that.
OK.
They are kooks, so I agree with Rush Limbaugh. Rush Limbaugh was using satire to bring attention to what this politically correct...
Using satire. Name-calling by anyone — I teach this to my children. You teach it to your children and your grandchildren, too. Name-calling by anyone — it's just unnecessary. It just wastes time. Let's speak to the issues and, again, let's move on.
I didn't hear Rush Limbaugh calling a group of people whom he did not agree with "f'ing retards." And we did know that Rahm Emanuel — it's been reported — did say that. There's a big difference there.
Oh, gee, I'll try. OK.
No idea. I have no idea.
Well, fire me, then, Roger. Sorry. I already failed. But listen, no, we have some strong — some young Turks in this party. Paul Ryan — I'm very impressed with Paul Ryan.
Yeah. He's good. Man, he is sharp. He is smart, articulate. And he is passionate about these commonsense solutions that America has got to adopt to get us on the right road. I can name a whole lot of people.
As I say, I could name a whole lot of them, but we don't have a whole lot of time. But I'm very impressed with many of the characters, the personalities, the — and those with great intelligence in this party, and I can't wait to see who rises to the surface after, hopefully, some very competitive, contested primaries.
... primaries that I look forward to will produce.
Well...
No. Don't know who conducted that poll. And I know that polls are fickle. And heck, after this interview, Chris, we may see a plummeting in the poll numbers. Who knows? These are fickle. I can't comment on what the poll numbers mean today.
I would. I would if I believed that that is the right thing to do for our country and for the Palin family. Certainly, I would do so.
It's going to be, thankfully, a lot of time to be able to make such a decision. Right now I'm looking at, as I say, other potential candidates out there who are strong. They're in a position of having kind of this luxury of having more information at their fingertips right now, so that the current events that we're talking about today they...
I think that it would be absurd to not consider what it is that I can potentially do to help our country. I don't know if it's going to be ever seeking a title, though. It may be just doing a darn good job...
... as a reporter or covering some of the current events.
I won't close the door that perhaps could be open for me in the future. I don't want any American to ever close the door in their personal or their professional lives and put themselves in a box and say, "Heck, yeah, I'm going to do that," or, "No way, I'm not going to do that," when we don't know what the future holds.
Ever since our PAC was formed, we have had good people contributing, some — many volunteers — I guess you would call them advisers, yes — firing away e-mails to me every morning saying this is what's happened in Washington overnight, you need to be aware of this. Good. It's great. It's helpful.
You mean conventionally how someone would — I have no idea how conventionally people do this, how they — how they try to open a door that perhaps isn't even open, and if that involves having a group of advisers send them e-mails every morning — I don't know how it works. I don't know. I'm just appreciative of having some good information at my fingertips right now.
Well, I would hope so. Yes, I am. Two years ago my engagement was on the State of Alaska — largest, most diverse state in the union, 20 percent of the U.S. domestic supply of energy coming from our state, while desiring to and working towards ramping up that domestic energy production. That was my focus.
I'm not suggesting that. I'm saying if he did, things would dramatically change. If he decided to toughen up and do all that he can to secure our nation and our allies, I think people would perhaps shift their thinking a little bit and decide, "Well, maybe he's tougher than we think he's — than he is today," and there wouldn't be as much passion to make sure that he doesn't serve another four years.
But today if the — if the election — he wouldn't win.
Then he's not going to win.
He's not going to win. If he continues on the path that he has America on today — and here's the deal. I — that's what a lot of Americans are telling him today, and he's not listening.
I'm not getting it. They're writing a check, a $100,000 check. And as I have said from day one on this, I'm turning right around and being able to contribute it back to the cause. That means to people, to events...
I don't know if it's going to go to the PAC or if it goes to some non-profit or what — bottom line, I'm not personally benefiting from this.
Well, first and foremost, I want to be a good mom. And I want to raise happy, healthy, independent children. And I want them to be good citizens of this great country.
Oh, you betcha!
It's good.
Thank you, I will.
one reason I like Texans. They don’t mess around with our Second Amendment rights. All this stuff coming lately from the White House to take away the good guys’ freedom, and, the right to protect ourselves with the most naive notion that the bad guys, who ignore the laws, that all of a sudden they’re going to follow some new laws. It’s not about the bad guys. No , it’s all about the lead, like solely – that chunk of metal didn’t commit the crime. That’s like saying solely, that fork made me fat.

And background checks, yeah, I guess to learn more about the person’s thinking and associations and intentions. More background checks? Dandy idea Mr. President – should have started with yours.

Well, it’s great to be back at CPAC. I’m so happy to be here and it feels like it’s coming home even though it is only my second time here, but I kinda feel like I’m getting the hang of it already, I can spot those Liberal media folk here to write their annual Conservatives in Crisis story. How many of you guys are here? Raise your hands…come on, raise your hands. Be proud. You’re loud. We’re used to it. Certainly you’re not ashamed to…raise it high. Don’t worry. We wouldn’t dream of making you wait outside on the party bus.

It is an honor to be here. We can come together folks for an adult conversation about the future of our country and heaven knows, we need this. So much of what passes for our national conversation is anything but.

Remember ‘No Drama Obama?’ If only. Now it All Drama Obama. We don’t have leadership coming out of Washington. We have reality television. It’s really bad reality TV and the American people tuned-out a long time ago. Entertainment TV is a good description of what is going on in DC because more than ever it feels like a put-on. Every event feels calculated to fool us somehow. Every speech feels like a con. Washington politicians, too many in both parties, have a bad habit of focusing on the process of politics instead of the purpose of politics, which is to lead and to serve. Even our guys in the GOP too often have a habit of reading their stage directions, especially these days. They are being too scripted, too calculated. They talk about rebuilding the party. How about rebuilding the Middle Class? They talk about rebranding the GOP instead of restoring the trust of the American people.

Now we can’t just ignore though, that…we just lost a big election. We came in second out of two. Second position on the dogsled team is where the view never changes and the view ain’t pretty.

We need to figure out then, our job. What will we do  next? As we go about that, as we talk to one another, and listen to what the speaker’s have to say, let’s be clear about one thing, we’re not here to rebrand a party, we’re here to rebuild a country. 

We’re not here to dedicate ourselves to new talking points coming from Washington, D.C. We’re not here to put a fresh coat of rhetorical paint on our party. We are not here to abandon our principles in a contest of government give-aways. That’s a game we will never, ever win. We are here to restore American and the rest is just theatrics, the rest is just sound and fury. It’s just making noise, and that sums up the job President Obama does today.

Now, he’s considered a good politician, which is like saying Bernie Madoff was a good salesman, the difference being the President is using our money.

You know I spend most of my time in heartland country, the heart of the heart of America and I have news for the permanent political class in Washington. While they’re busy worrying about their own political future, things are bad out here. Nearly 8% unemployment rate. It doesn’t begin to capture how bad things are. Even in the dismal rates announced of  .1% economic growth, that doesn’t tell the story of the pain that Americans feel.

Our president fancies himself as the champion of the Middle Class, yet since he came on scene, even those lucky enough to have a job, they’re working more for less. The median income for families has dropped over $5,000.00 since ’07, even as we work longer and longer hours. And job creators are being punished. Tell me how does punishing the job creators, create more jobs?

It cost nearly 100 bucks now to fuel up your truck. It costs tens of thousands of dollars to send your child to college. Man, the cost of a case of diapers today…these prices…the cost, the impacts on the American family budget, and the Middle Class Americans, while we’re breaking their budget, the Democrat-controlled Senate refuses to pass a budget. That was how many years ago that  they did? How many Trillions-in-debt-ago? All in violation of Article I Section 9, Clause 7 of our U.S. Constitution. No budget for 4 years. No budget for 4 years is not just bureaucratic bungling. Refusing to pass a budget is refusing to declare what it intends to do with the people’s money.

Barack Obama promised the most transparent administration ever. Barack Obama, you lied.

There is a direct correlation between the Senate stubbornly refusing to pass a budget, and the Senate selfishlessly agreeing to go ahead and spend our children and our children’s money. No budget is no leadership. It is time for America to get more outraged about this. Never before have our challenges been so big and our leaders so small.

Now when we were here last year, the words on everyone’s lips and the wish in your heart was for Barack to pack-her up and bubble wrap the Nobel and the clubs and the high-tops and head on back to Chicago.

Well, the election came and went  but the campaign never stopped, at a time when our country is desperate for leadership, we get instead a permanent campaign, but here’s the thing, leaders take risks for the good of our country. Campaigners make promises they can’t keep. Leaders reach across political differences. Campaigners double-down on those differences. Leaders seek to bring Americans together to confront our challenges and campaigners seek to divide and to conquer and to create crisis after crisis after crisis, to exploit.

Mr President we admit it, you won. Accept it. Now step away from the teleprompter and do your job.

The permanent political class is in permanent political mode so where do we go from here? One of my idols, Lady Margaret Thatcher, she offered this advice after her party lost at the poll. She told fellow conservatives not to get lost in abstract debates and green-eye-shade accounting. Mrs. Thatcher advised conservatives to focus their concerns first and foremost on the people. She said, look at every problem from the grassroots, not from the top down. She also cautioned Conservatives not to go wobbly on their beliefs, to which I offer a hearty Amen Sistah! We can use a leader like Maggie Thatcher today.

But just think about it at a time when Washington is so powerful that seven of the ten highest income counties in the country ring the city, allow yourself to imagine leadership that deems to understand us little people, us clinging to our God, our Guns our Constitution and our grassroots – imagine leadership that actually takes seriously the idea of government of the people, by the people, for the people, and then imagine leadership that knows how to prioritize to ensure national security and to stop goverrnment waste. That’s leadership that would have as it’s guiding light, it’s great North Star, our U.S. Constitution.

Friends, it’s no accident that it’s opening words are We the People, and while you are dreaming, imagine leadership that respects the Second Amendment to the Constitution. The majority of Americans want this.

Is there any wonder there was such a run on guns and ammo for Christmas presents, considering the attack on the Second Amendment? A couple of months ago – oh you should have seen what Todd got me for Christmas. Well, it wasn’t that exciting. It’s a metal rack, a case for hunting rifles to put on the back of a Four-Wheeler, then though, I had to get something for him to put in the gun case, right? So this go-round, he got the rifle, I got the rack. (big applause and she pulls out her Big Gulp and takes a sip till the crowd calms down.)

Oh Bloomberg’s not around. Our Big Gulp’s okay. Shoot it’s just pop with low-cal ice cubes in it. I hope that’s okay. What did you think was in it? Yeah, you Young Republicans, especially you who went Greek – I am so proud of you guys, all of you. College Republicans, there on campus. You are so bold, in your…well. All right. You guys keep your courage up, and my only piece of advice, because I’m a Mom, to our young College Republicans is, ya gotta be thinking Sam Adams, not drinking Sam Adams. and that’s just a joke. I don’t want to hear from the CEO of some brewery accusing me of being anti-beer. It was joke. You guys just keep up your good work.

Seriously though, when we do see harm. When we see life snuffed out through violent, evil acts, imagine leadership that doesn’t seek to exploit the tragedy. Imagine leadership that seeks real solutions to the violence, not cheap political games. That would be leadership worthy of its name. That would be leadership worthy of those words “We the People.” Creating government of, by, for the people. It also means ending the poisonous practice of  treating Americans of different social, ethnic, religious groups as different electorates to be pandered to with different promises. If we truly believe the words of our other founding document, The Declaration of Independence, that yes all men are created equal, then there are no Hispanic issues or African American issues or women’s issues. There are only American issues.

Now CPAC in order to be effective, in order to have any power to change things for the better, as Conservatives, we must leave no American behind and we must share our powerful message of freedom and liberty to all citizens, even those who may disagree on some issues because there is solid common ground in fighting against government overreach and for independence. And those who may disagree with us on some issues, they are not our enemies. They’re our sisters and our brothers. They’re our neighbors. They’re our friends. It’s imperative to reach out and to share that conservative message of liberty and less government and lower taxes and individual responsibility.

It’s time we all stopped preaching to the choir and let’s grow. America already has one party that’s expert at pitting groups against one another. We’ll never win a contest of identity politics. We shouldn’t even try. If ‘Believe in America’ is more than just a catchy campaign slogan, then we have to believe in America’s exceptionalism, and her greatest achievement that no one is guaranteed success but everyone is guaranteed an equal opportunity at success.

The greatest lie that the government tells is that government is the way to realize this guarantee. There is a simple reason why Washington, DC is an island of prosperity in a nation mired in near recession. Whenever government expands, it’s the well-connected that reap the benefit. The more government intrudes into our lives and businesses, the more it picks winners and losers. The more crony capitalists win, the more the rest of us lose. Whether it’s green energy or free Obama phones or prophylactics, if you don’t have a team of lobbyists in DC or a cancelled contribution check, you’re not at the table – you’re on the menu.

If Mrs. Thatcher were with us here today, she would remind us, there’s a big difference between being pro-business and being pro-free market. On this there can be no mistaking where free market stands. It’s time for We the People to break up the cronyism and put a stake through the heart of too big to fail once and for all.

That includes in these resource rich states like Alaska, my home state. Read your Constitution Alaskans. Realize that the natural resources that God has created for mankind’s use, are not owned by the big multi-national conglomerates and the monopolies. They’re owned by The People. They don’t own them, so don’t let them own you. You have a right for those resources to be developed for our use.

Ending the top-down approach of DC also means changing our top-down political process. The next election is 20-months away. Now is the time to furlough the consultants, and tune-out the pollsters, send the focus groups home and throw out the political scripts, because if we truly know what we believe, we don’t need professionals to tell us.

And if we truly seek to know the hearts and minds of the people, there is no substitute for going out and asking them – being one of them with real world experience, actual conversations with actual hard-working Americans, and that goes for finding candidates as well. Creating a government by, for the people. It means looking toward our communities, our PTAs, our service clubs, small businesses, Tea Party rallies and City Halls – for people who are willing to lead. Do you know someone who’s judgement you trust, someone who doesn’t just preach common sense, but who actually lives it? Well, encourage her or him to run for office.

Are you mad as hell and think you have a better way? Then run yourself. Don’t let the big consultants, the big money men and the big bad media scare you off. Don’t let them invalidate you when you no doubt have more real world, practical experience with family and real work. That’s real life, than those in the political bubble who try to tell you who’s worthy, who just doesn’t fit their bill. The last thing we need is Washington DC vetting our candidates.

If these experts who keep losing elections and keep getting rehired and getting millions , if they feel that strong about who gets to run in this party, then they should buck-up or stay in the truck. Buck up or run. The Architect can head on back to the great Lone Star State and put their name on some ballot – though for their sakes, I hope they give themselves a discount on their consulting services.

Friends you have heard a lot of different voices, offering a lot of different ideas the past few days. I am just humbled. I am just so grateful to be just one of them. I have been so blessed to spend so much of these past years getting to know even more of America, not from the top down, but from the heart looking out, and this I know, there is more wisdom, more character, more grit and common sense in the soldiers and the Mom’s and the teacher’s and the laborers and the firemen and the fishermen and the students and the cowboys – and other extraordinary Americans that I’ve met along the way, than will ever be found in the cocktail parties of power across the river, and …

…if We the People have one message to send to Washington, I’m sure it would be this: Get Over Yourself. It’s not about you.

I think it's what I'm representing and what the message is and that is true reform of government that is so needed, and having a representative of someone who has a track record of showing that, yeah, you can, you can do this, you can reform, you can put government back on the side of the people, you can fight corruption. You can actually take steps towards helping our nation become energy-independent and all those things that we're talking about. I think that more and more Americans are realizing that, well, good, we have a candidate who has actually done some of those things and it's not just, talkin' the talk, she's gonna tell us how she's done this.

You know, that's a good point about that experience and we don't like to toot our own horn so we don't, I don't talk about my experience that much in terms of years in office or in positions that have been executive experience but, I have, I do have more experience than [Democratic presidential candidate Sen.] Barack Obama does. You know, he had served for his 300 days before he became a presidential candidate and that wasn't in executive office, of course, but, as an executive, working with John McCain, we will take on the special interests and we will clean up Wall Street and some of the abuse of the power in Washington, D.C., also to first and foremost get government back on the side of the people, and, we do this economically speaking here, by cutting taxes, not increasing them, allowing our small businesses and our families to keep more of what they earn, and produce so that they can reinvest according to their priorities. Not politicians' priorities and special interests' priorities. Our small businesses, keeping more of what they earn, that allows them to create more jobs, they're gonna be hiring more people, that gets our economy going. That's what has happened in the opportunities that I've had in executive positions as mayor, manager, and as governor. It works. Reining in government growth, recognizing government certainly plays appropriate roles in building infrastructure, providing tools for our families, for our businesses, but then government kinda getting outta the way as you have great oversight making sure that there isn't the corruption and the abuse, but government, I think get outta the way and let the private sector do what it does best.

We are.

Mm-hmm. Well, day one, you bring in everyone around that table, too, you bring in the congressional leadership, and, assuming that there will be, certainly, Democrats, at that table, that's good, too, these are gonna be bipartisan approaches that must be taken, I have that executive experience also having formed a cabinet up there in Alaska that, you know, we've got independents and Democrats and Republicans whom I have appointed to our administrative positions to that, we have the best of ideas coming together in order to best serve the people. John McCain, too, he's been known as the maverick to take on his own party when need be, to reach over the aisle and work with the other party also. Now, Barack Obama has not been able to do that, he's gone with, what is it, 96 percent of the time with Democrat leadership. Not having that, I think, ability or willingness to work with the other side. So as an executive, we need to create that team that is full of good ideas and not let obsessive partisanship get in the way, as we start taking the measures to shore up our economy, which already Congress is working on with the rescue package, with some of the bailout packages, the provisions in there that can work, too, but it's gonna take everybody working together.

I don't know why you wouldn't, if they, if these Democrats are best suited to serve, and if they will not let obsessive partisanship get in the way of just doing what's right with a team effort, and support of the president to get this economy moving, and to win these wars, to meet these great challenges, I wouldn't have as my litmus test a party affiliation.

Yeah.

Sure.

I'm not gonna call him a socialist, but, as Joe the plumber had suggested, in fact he came right out and said it sounds like socialism to him and he speaks for so many Americans who are quite concerned now, after hearing finally what Barack Obama's true intentions are with his tax and economic plan, and that is, to take more from small businesses, more from our families, and then redistribute that according to his priorities. That is, that is not good for the entrepreneurial spirit that has built this great country. That is not good for our economy, certainly it's not good for the opportunities that our small businesses should have, to keep more of what they produce, in order to hire more people, create more jobs. That's what gets the economy going. So, finally Joe the plumber and as we talked about today in the speech, too, he's representing, you know, Jane the engineer and Molly the dental hygienist and Chuck the teacher and, and all these good, hard-working Americans who are, finally, were able to hear in very plain talk the other night, what Barack Obama's intentions were to redistribute wealth.

Well, anyone who would want to increase taxes at a time like this, especially with economic woes that are adversely affecting all of us, anybody who would want to do that to take more from businesses and our families, and then dole those dollars out according to their priorities, that, that is not a principal of capitalism.

We cannot start moving closer and closer to socialism. That will destroy the entrepreneurial spirit in America. That will punish hard work and productivity, and that work ethic that we try to instill in our children so that they will know that they can be rewarded for their productivity, for their hard work. We cannot move in that direction, that it should be so concerning for any American voter to consider that perhaps there are some who would like us to go there. Now, as for the economic bailout provisions and the measures that have already been taken, it is a time of crisis and government did have to step in playing an appropriate role to shore up the housing market to make sure that we're thawing out some of the potentially frozen credit lines and credit markets, government did have to step in there. But now that we're hearing that the Democrats want an additional stimulus package or bailout package for what, hundreds of billions of dollars more, this is not a time to use the economic crisis as an excuse for reckless spending and for greater, bigger government and to move the private sector to the back burner and let government be assumed to be the be-all, end-all solution to the economic challenges that we have. That's what's scaring me now about hearing that the Democrats have an even greater economic bailout package, but we don't know all the details of it yet and we'll certainly pay close attention to it.

On its face, I want to make sure that this is not being used by the Democrats as a time for bigger government, more dollars being taken from taxpayers to bail out anybody, any entity that's been engaged in corruption, in self-dealing, in greed, there on Wall Street or in D.C. that has adversely affected Main Street, so, on its face, I, what we're gonna need to know more about what the Democrats have in mind for this additional bailout.

Yes.

I beg to differ with that, because what McCain has talked about with shoring up the home mortgage market also to make sure that we, we're gonna have a level playing field here. He's not asking for an additional hundreds of billions of dollars, he's saying, OK, with the $700 billion that his colleagues and he there in Congress have already approved, let's make sure that the priority is, we're gonna help the homeowners who had been kinda sucked into the wrong mortgage, and that was via predatory lenders taking advantage unfortunately and exploiting too many Americans. He's saying let's take the dollars that are already there and let's best use them. Let's, he's not saying, more, more, more government intervention and more dollars. He's saying, let's best use the dollars that have already been approved.

Well, we've talked a lot about that, John McCain and I have, about the missions that I'll get to embark on if we are so blessed to be hired by the American people to work for them. It's gonna be government reform, because that is what I've been able to do as a mayor and as a governor. You take on the special interests and the self-dealings. Yep, you ruffle feathers and you have the scars to prove it afterwards, but you have to take that on to give the American people that faith back in their own government. This is their government and we gotta put it back on their side. So, government reform and energy independence, can't wait to work on that. That's been my forte as the governor of an energy-producing state and as a former chair of the energy regulator entity up there in Alaska. So, look forward to that and that's a matter of national security and our economic prosperity opportunities. That though, too, the other mission that John and I are anxious for me to lead on is helping our families who have children with special needs, ushering in that spirit to Washington, D.C., where we saw, we're gonna give every child a chance and a good educational opportunity will be provided. That's gonna be a matter, too, of prioritizing the federal dollars that are already there and making sure that every child is given opportunity.

Tasergate, right, right,

We sure do.

Right.

Not at all because A, that, the trooper who had tasered his kid and had, you know, made death threats against my family and said he was gonna bring the governor down and all that. My husband did exactly, I think, what any sensible, reasonable father, husband would do who was concerned about their family's safety.

Not when you look at other governors' track records when they had their spouse as for instance [former Alaska Gov. Frank Murkowski] had his spouse as his top adviser, and she was in meetings, she was in the office so, you know, kinda, of a double standard here. But what Todd was what any reasonable husband and father would do. He followed the instruction of the Department of Public Safety's own personal security detail that is our personal protection. They asked Todd, you have a problem with this state trooper, he is a threat, you need to take that to the commissioner of the Department of Public Safety. Todd did exactly that and then of course, he got clobbered for it, now in the media because there's a misunderstanding of what he's done. Our Department of Law in Alaska has right there on its Web site -- it said, if you have a problem with an Alaska state trooper, the paragraph says, you go to the Commissioner of Department of Public Safety and you share that concern with him. That's what Todd did. So no, I don't think that it was an abuse of power of my office at all. And I was very thankful that that report cleared me of any illegal dealings or anything else. I replaced the commissioner because he was not doing the job that I expect of my cabinet members. That is, you serve the Alaskan population up there. Of course he's a cabinet member who was assigned to do that, to the best of our team's ability and you have a lotta energy, you fulfill the vision that we have laid out for you, and he wasn't doing that and that's why he was replaced.

I'm concerned about and focused on just the next two weeks, Drew, and again getting that message out there to the American public. Thankfully, too, the American public is seeing clearer and clearer what the choices are in these tickets. I think, some revelation just occurred, not just with Joe the plumber but revelation occurred with [Democratic vice presidential candidate] Joe Biden's comment the other night that, he telling his Democratic financial donors saying that, he said mark my word, there's gonna be economic, and, or international crisis he said, if Barack Obama is elected, because he will be tested and he said there are four or five scenarios that will result in an international crisis with an untested presidential candidate in Barack Obama and -- first I think we need to thank Joe for the warning there. But, Joe's words there I think, can shed some light, too, in terms of the contrast you have in the tickets. John McCain is a tested leader. He has gone through great adversity. He has the scars to prove it. He has shown his true leadership. It hasn't just been all talk, and Joe Biden's comments there about an untested, as he had said in the primary, unprepared candidate to be president, I think was very telling.

On the four or five scenarios, that, well, who knows what Joe Biden was talking about, you know? It, all you have to do, though, is look back at Obama's foreign policy agenda and you can assume what some of those scenarios may be. As he considers sitting down and talking to [Iranian President Mahmoud] Ahmadinejad or [former Cuban President] Fidel Castro or [North Korean President] Kim Jong Il, some of these dictators, without preconditions being met, essentially validating some of what those dictators have been engaged in, that could be one of the scenarios that Joe Biden is talking about is, as a result of that, that proclamation that he would meet without preconditions being met first. That could be a scenario that results in a testing of our country, and, the four or five other scenarios that he's talking about, I don't know, I hope that Joe Biden will explain it.

So could I, on that one especially.

Drew, you need to ask your colleagues and I guess your bosses or whoever is in charge of all this, why does Joe Biden get a pass on such a thing? Can you imagine if I would've said such a thing? No, I think that, you know, we would be hounded and held accountable for, what in the world did you mean by that, VP presidential candidate? Why would you say that, mark my words, this nation will undergo international crisis if you elect Barack Obama? If I would've said that you guys'd clobbered me.

Sure, good.

Ehhh, I don't want that misunderstood. No, I do not want that misunderstood. You know, when I go to these rallies and we see the patriotism just shining through these people's faces and the Vietnam veterans wearing their hats so proudly and they have tears in their eyes as we sing our national anthem and it is so inspiring and I say that this is true America, you get it, you understand how important it is that in the next four years we have a leader who will fight for you. I certainly don't want that interpreted as one area being more patriotic or more American than another. If that's the way it's come across, I apologize. 

It's ridiculous to suggest that or to say that I couldn't tell people what I read. Because by that point already it was relatively early in that multi segmented interview with Katie Couric, it was quite obvious that it was going to be a bit of an annoying interview with the badgering of the questions...I think if most normal Americans were put in the same position that I was there, they'd probably look at her and have thatproverbial eye roll and say are you kidding me?

Are you suggesting that I don't read?

You know what I thought they were going to come after me for? Getting a "D" in a college course 22 years ago. That was the big controversy in my little world. That was the skeleton in my closet. Crap. Once the media finds that out.

After a year of getting clobbered by the media, capitalizing on people who will make things up, there does come a time in any mama's heart and gut where they're going to say no, no, no. You're picking on my kids. You're picking on my family. I'm going to set the record straight. My guttural instinct kind is kind of like a mama grizzly bear. You touching my cubs, you're touching my kids.

I believe that I am because I have common sense. And I have, I believe, the values that are reflective of so many other American values. And I believe that what Americans are seeking is not the elitism, the kind of a spinelessness that perhaps is made up for that with some kind of elite Ivy League education and a fact resume that's based on anything but hard work and private sector, free enterprise principles. Americans could be seeking something like that in positive change in their leadership. I'm not saying that has to be me. 


I studied journalism in college and always had an interest in the newsroom, which was of course so often focused on politics and government. I studied sports reporting, and that's how I started off in journalism. But even earlier than that, my dad was an elementary school teacher, so often our dinner-table conversations were about current events and about those things that an elementary school teacher teaches students — much about government and much about our nation, and so I had ingrained in me an interest in our government, how things worked. And then from there I just became more interested in more practical steps that I could take... [I] started off running for city council when I was very young in the town [Wasilla] where I had grown up and was elected to two terms on the city council. And then I realized to be really able to make a difference — not just being one of six of a body but to make a difference — I would have to run for the top dog position, and so I ran for mayor and was elected mayor for two terms.

Then from there I was appointed an oil and gas commissioner in the state of Alaska, on the Alaska oil and gas conservation commission, had decided that there were changes, positive changes, that had to be ushered into our state government, decided to run for governor and did so, was successful, and here we are.

I think was 27 or 28, and then was elected mayor when I was 32.

What's more of a challenge for me over the years being in elected office has been more the age issue rather than a gender issue. I've totally ignored the issues that have potentially been affecting me when it comes to gender because I was raised in a family where, you know, gender wasn't going to be an issue. The girls did what the boys did. Apparently in Alaska that's quite commonplace. You're out there hunting and fishing. My parents were coaches, so I was involved in sports all my life. So I knew that as woman I could do whatever the men were doing. Also that's just part of Alaskan life.

But the age issue I think was more significant in my career than the gender issue. Your resume not being as fat as your opponent's in a race, perhaps [but] being able to capitalize on that... being able to to use that in campaigns — I don't have 30 years of political experience under my belt ... that's a good thing, that's a healthy thing. That means my perspective is fresher, more in touch with the people I will be serving. I would use that as an advantage. I've certainly never been part of a good old boy club. That I would use in a campaign. And that's been good.

The planks in our party's platform — they're sound, they are solid. They are the right agenda for America. I know the Republican platform is right for my state in Alaska because the planks we can stand solidly on are respect for equality and respect for life and an acknowledgment that it is individual Americans and American families who can make better decisions for ourselves than government can ever make for us. So individual freedom and independence is extremely important to me and that's why I'm a Republican, and there are planks in our platform that reflect that. 

 What, on a real practical level here, the GOP has got to do, though, between now and the election, is to convince Americans that it is our energy policy that is best for our nation and the nation's future, that if we are to become energy independent and if we are to become a more secure nation then we had better start supplying our very, very hungry markets across the nation with American supplies of energy. And up here in Alaska we're sitting on billions of barrels of oil. We're sitting on hundreds of trillions of cubic feet of natural gas onshore and offshore. And it seems to be only the Republicans who understand that companies should be competing for the right to tap those resources, and get that energy source flowing into these hungry markets so that we will be less reliant on foreign sources of energy. In a volatile world, relying on foreign regimes that are not friendly to Americans, asking them to ramp up resource production for our benefit, that's nonsensical.

The GOP agenda to ramp up domestic supplies of energy is the only way that we are going to become energy independent, the only way that we are going to become a more secure nation. And I say this, of course, knowing the situation we are in right now — at war, not knowing what the plan is to ever end the war we are engaged in, understanding that Americans are seeking solutions and are seeking resolution in this war effort. So energy supplies and being able to produce and supply domestically is going to be a big part of that. And the GOP agenda is the right agenda in that respect, but the GOP is going to have to prove to Americans in following weeks that we can safely, responsibly and ethically develop these resources. That, of course, has been a problem for the GOP. And a problem up here in Alaska. We have state lawmakers serving time in prison right now... other lawmakers whom the FBI is probing right now... because they have been found, some, to be corrupt in oil and gas issues, having taken bribes. That does not bode well for the GOP. And that's gotta change.

We have protected our state sovereignty by taking on the big oil industry interests, making sure that there is not going to be any undue influence on the oil industry, that our state administration and our state lawmakers will be making the decisions we will be making... based on sound, solid, unbiased information, not being corrupted by, in the case that I'm speaking of now, [an] oil service company's undue influence that has corrupted some lawmakers. We have set in place ethics laws, overseeing agencies and offices to make sure that never happens again in Alaska. So that's something we're very proud of. And we have allowed measures to be put in place now where we can prove very, very sound and strict oversight of oil and gas development so that we can prove to the rest of the nation that we are ready, willing and we are able to safely develop our resources. So that Alaska can be contributers, we can be producers, so we don't have to be takers from federal government. but can be supplying the rest of the U.S. with American resources finally.

Not so much being a politician. I can't recall a conversation or a moment that I decided that. But knowing that I did want to make a difference. And knowing that my parents had filled in me and my sisters and my brother the desire to work hard and to seek to serve something greater than self. I attribute that passion in me to my parents because that's the way they have lived.... I think it was just in my upbringing, observing the way that my parents live ... as a schoolteacher — and the school secretary was my mom — and as coaches, volunteers in the community, and that to this day they're still helping out with students and kids and activities in Alaska. Just this general observation that's fulfilling, the actions that they take do make a difference, they make people's lives better. I did want to be a part of that. It was a given for my siblings and for me and, naturally, an expectation that we were to do that. So, now my siblings have ended up — one's an elementary school teacher, one's a pediatric hygienist (she's also worked in the dental industry)... we all have our little niches. I'm the only one who got into politics. My parents were never partisan. In fact I won't be surprised if most folks in my family are registered as either nonpartisan or independents. But just that sense of contributing to community has been very, very strong and a solid part of my foundation based on my upbringing.

I'm just very blessed. My husband loves being a dad as much as I love being a mom. I've got great help there. But also my immediate family and my extended family, for the most part, are Alaskans, they're here, helping with a network, a support system. I got a couple of aunts outside in Washington state too who are very, very helpful to me. So logistically speaking it's not impossible what I'm doing. I've got great assistance. And having big kids in addition to the little ones... the big kids help out so much with the little one. 

 I have a 19 year old who's getting ready to be deployed to Iraq. His striker brigade leaves on September 11 of this year. He's 19 and he'll be gone for a year. [And so] on a personal level, when I talk about the plan for the war, let's make sure we have a plan here. And respecting McCain's position on that too, though. And I have a daughter who will be 18 here shortly, another daughter 14, another daughter 7. My daughter just walked into my office. [Sound of child whispering. "I'm not eight till next year."] And I have a baby who is three months old. Trig was just born recently, And he's just an awesome sweet baby. Trig was born with Down Syndrome so this was a whole new ballgame for us, just understanding this very, very special child, who's such an awesome fit in our lives right now. It's just very nice and full life that we have right now...I knew while I was pregnant that he would be born with Down Syndrome. So I was as prepared as one could be.

Absolutely, and because I have both boys and girls I have a greater respect for equality and making sure that gender is not an issue and that everyone is treated equally. Because my husband is Alaska native, my kids have provided me an opportunity to really respect the Alaska native heritage, the culture.

My son being in a striker brigade in the army has really opened my eyes to international events, and how war impacts everyday Americans like us when we have a child who chooses to enlist and to serve [for] the right reasons. Certainly a child born with Down Syndrome has opened my eyes too to challenges that others have. Every American has a challenge. Every American has battles and bumps in the road in their lives. It's just really opened my eyes to a larger world than maybe what I had been used to.

Yeah, just a myriad of examples I can give and how being a mom changes my perspective. And education is very, very important to me because I have got kids today in the system, in the public school system. I want to make sure that we are adequately funded, but that we have high standards and accountability in our schools so that every public dollar is spent wisely. Because I walk into those schools on a regular basis and I want to make sure that our public schools are as good as they can be because my kids are a part of them.

You know, I don't know. I knew early on that the smartest thing for me to do was to work hard, do the best that I can, make wise decisions based on good information in front of me. And then put my life, get myself on a path that could be dedicated to God and ask Him what I should next. That will be the position I will be in as long as I'm on earth — that is, seeking the right path that God would have laid out for me.


You know, I can't think of anything. Except here in Alaska my family is a microcosm of so much of Alaska. My husband is a commercial fisherman. He also works up in the north slopes in the oil fields. I'm the first female governor in Alaska, so that's brought with it kind of a whole new chapter in Alaska's life. Like my husband — up here they refer to him as the "first dude," not the first gentleman. And Todd... And he is such a dude. He's a four-time winner of the Iron Dog snow machine race, which is the the world's longest and they say toughest snow machine race, 2,000 miles across Alaska. A whole new chapter here when Todd is asked to do things like — and he graciously complies and he has a good time doing it — hosting, as he did a couple of weeks ago down in Juneau, our capital city, the former first ladies tea party. And he does just great at things like that, as well as working in oil fields, with snow machines and in commercial fishing. That's a dynamic here that's of interest to others. Again, sort of a microcosm of that... reflective of an Alaskan lifestyle that so many of us participate in.

I hadn't thought of that. Lots of unconventional schedules up here. Our kids are very, very, very adaptable because they've grown up with unconventional schedules. With Todd's slope work, he works 700 miles away from home. And the commercial fishing. And I've got a busy schedule. They're very adaptable and well adjusted. Everything seems to work the way it's supposed to work. Thanks to my husband keeping things organized. Even from far away, he does.


I thank you so much. It's so great to be back in Iowa. You know, we have great memories here of the many trips now that we've been blessed to take here. You know, of course, the '08 campaign. And then the even more fun Tea Party rally that we had in Indianola – that was fun. We've had…oh gosh…chowing down on fried everything at your state fair, of course.

And then, one year, thinking that, a bit after the fair, I was going to work some of it off, so we drive up to Storm Lake and I'm thinking…there was a half marathon going on…I'm thinking, hey, I could go incognito, I'm going to jump into this race, and… incognito, Latin, for me it means "no makeup"…I have…scare little children. So I'm running a race, I jump in there, and I'm incognito I'm thinking, I'm running in peace, you know, no one talking politics. Of course I’m sucking air the whole way so I can't talk anyway. But you know, no press there with those suspicious thinking of theirs…signals…you know, she's in Iowa, what is she doing? And it seems like the Iowa politicos, too, very good at sensing, you know, who's coming, who's going, and the significance of your state of course.

So anyway, I'm running, but no press kind of bugging me about, are you going to run for president or not, because that was the year of that question. So jumping in the race, I'm running, across the finish line, and boom! There I am accused of running that race for political purposes. And I find out, I find out that, okay, I'm in Iowa, the race happened to be called Storm Lake's Jump Right In and Run race. I got a medal! I jumped right in.

So, of course, the press is like, you orchestrated that. You know, you came all the way to Iowa for that race. And I'm like, oh yeah, ask Todd, you know, I'm the one who made him pull over that day to run the race.

Anyway, our best memories, though, are of the wonderful friends that we have made here, just, ah, good people, hard workers, with love for this great country, that, they show with, you know, your work ethic and with, shoot, even driving by your homes with the flags waving on front porches, where on any given night I think a whole lot of you might be found out there on your porch proudly clinging to your guns, your god, your Constitution. And it is because of that, because of you, that the rest of the country knows this part of America as the Heartland.

And last time I was here to campaign, it was for one of those friends whom we have made, and you know her as a soldier and a farmer and a good neighbor. And then, back then, I called her a pistol-packin, Harley-ridin' Mama Grizzly, and now I am thrilled to get to call her your senator, Joni Ernst.

Well, other friends, too. It was here in Iowa that I first met a big, burly bold but kind of sheepdog-humble type of guy, a guy who wanted to help us out with security, and so happy to get it bring him to Iowa and get to know him very well, 'cause he was a veteran and you know my heart for the military. He was incredibly humble and we became friends with him over the years; Todd and he especially becoming, becoming friends. We learned more and more about his amazing story and it is the story of so many of our vets, incredible sacrifice to protect our freedoms, and while we miss that particular friend now we are so happy that the rest of America is getting to know more and more the story of American sniper Chris Kyle. It was here it was here that we were introduced to Chris. And you know why that movie is breaking records all over this great nation. It's because America needs a hero again and Chris Kyle has been that man, and screw the left in Hollywood who can't understand what it is that we see in someone like Chris Kyle and all of our vets.

So the last couple days, my daughter Bristol and I we have been at a great big gun show in Las Vegas and there at the gun show at the SHOT Show, getting to link up with Taya, with Chris Kyle's wife, and Taya, throwing a big party there honoring vets, honoring those who have supported her cause now that Chris is gone and carrying on her husband's legacy, spending hours visiting with these vets and, and like most military families, having that that sincere appreciation for what other military families go through, so spending so much time with these other vets.

Well, at this party…. Man, it seems like we're always kinda going rogue or something, always happens when…. We're at the party and I'm with Taya, we're signing books, and in the back this this young, very energetic very bold young vet, he holds up a sign and it was a bold, four-letter letter message to Michael Moore that he'd written out. And I'm like, oh man, look it…. And I call him up front, you know. And he's holdin' the poster and I'm looking at it, he's showing it to me, and of course pictures started snappin', you know, 'cause I'm giving, I'm giving the poster the ole thumbs-up…and it was my thumb, you know, it wasn't any other finger, it was my thumb. Oh that poster, though, he, he, you've heard the term swear like a sailor even though I think this guy was a soldier, you know, same thing. Well, anyway, someone snapping that photo and…. We've taken a lot of heat over it the last two day for being seen with this photo with a four-letter message to Michael Moore that he deserves.

Well, I was thinking…. I was thinking, okay, we'll take that heat, that's okay because what the poster said is what the rest of us are thinking. It just said it, and what it really came down to was our message to those who don't understand, again, the opportunity they have to do whatever the heck they want to do even if they are jerks. Because is our vets, our active service members who are out there protecting their freedom to to be jerks. If you love freedom, you thank a vet, and I know that you guys get that and that's why I am glad to be in Iowa because I am among friends who understand that that foundational aspect of America. We appreciate our vets.

Okay and one other…this connection to Iowa before I get to the meat of the speech. Okay, someone else who hails from the Hawkeye State just, uh, you know, speaking of Bristol being here with me, part of the family….Maybe you've seen her in the news recently because photos of her were posted and they were, hm, they were candid photos. She was au naturel. Just…nothing on but leather, strip of leather. A collar, my dog, Jill Hadassah…she's from Iowa. She was trained here in Iowa, Jill was. And as Congressman King was alluding to, er ah…another scandal with the Palins. These pictures were posted of her because she has been trained as a companion for my youngest child, Trig, who has special needs, and this beautiful strapping healthy Lab of ours, Jill, she was trained by the same talent the Puppy Jake Foundation, that trains service dogs for our vets. Yes. So we've been honored to get to be a part of that, of that organization, that charity and our dog…. We're happy that Jill is from Puppy Jake Foundation, our connection to Iowa. So anyway, these pictures, well it was just scandalous that I would show are our big, strapping, as I say, healthy Lab, letting my little, tiny boy use her as a stepping stool to get to reach the kitchen sink. He kinda stood on her and looked down into the kitchen sink. I took a picture and I said, Hey this is what turning a stumbling block into a stepping stone is all about and we should all live that way. Totally innocent. Who in the world woulda thunk that it would become this huge scandal that these pictures were…. But the usual suspects, they just went loco. They just went absolutely crazy and you know, yeah, the rest of this tinderbox of a world, everything that's going on in it, right, and yet this was just the most outrageous thing that had happened. PETA, barking their tired old death threats against us and I'm thinking, oh get in line, weasels, you know. Yeah. They're howlin', howlin' through the press that, you know, "cruelty to animals, Sarah Palin," which, which surprised me considering what it does, what Joni does to those poor, defenseless, really great-tasting Iowa hogs. Yeah. And not to mention what the President admitted to doing to those innocent Indonesian puppies, huh. So Jill Hadassah, she's wonderful, she's another connection to Iowa and her motto is, better a stepping stone than a snack. Yeah. Better stepped on, than scarfed up. And yet, media crews fight us, yeah, that's right. We're getting' use to that.

Thank you so much, Citizens United. Awesome group. Thank you for the invitation. And of course Congressman Steve King. My goodness, Steve…very strong. He going rogue there in DC, putting principle over party privilege by being one of the brave, one of the few to actually pull the lever for change in congressional leadership so we can have new energy and we can have that conservative movement…the policies that will get the country back on the right track, he voted for that change.

Mostly though I thank you for being here. Thank you…today you, hearing many words from many different people but one thing is in common and that is we believe what Ronald Reagan believed. That is, we are a people who have a government. It's not a government that has a people. And it was Jefferson warning, when the people fear their government…ah, there's tyranny. But when government fears the people, there's freedom. We're here in the name of freedom.

So we are here in that name of freedom, and you, Iowa, you get to help decide who will fight for it. You'll caucus to help choose our next president. It's just about a year from now. Can't come soon enough. It's about dang time. And candidates will come here to earn your vote. The rest America, watching, and trusting Iowa to put 'em through the test to insure that they are ready for war. And it is war. It's war for the future of our country, it's war for the sovereignty and solvency of the United States of America.

Now the other side, the far left? They see it, they see a need for change. But…it's by offering real change – again? You know…coronation, rinse, repeat. Or Clinton, rinse, repeat. Clinton, rinse, repeat. That's change? These leftists, they're promoting these "Ready For" campaigns. They say, Ready for Hillary. Well, hopey-changey, astroturfy, DC-based businesses that are disguised as grassroots – they're nothing new. But – don't you wonder what the White House thinks of their peeps out there prancing around, squealing that, ohh, they're ready for someone else? They have to admit it, even, because they know that he who was The One, now with tee time on the mind, he is so over it. America, he's just not that into you.

But the $18 trillion question, though, is, do the candidates they're ready for represent any real hope, any change, or is it more of the same old failed statism that we suffered from? What can they do differently to put an economy on the side of the middle class instead of the side of their crony capitalists? Will they worry more about securing our borders and less about securing a primo tee time? How well they protect our standing across the world when they can't even protect an ambassador? When will they listen to concerns of we the people, instead of listening in on our phone calls? And how will they ax Obamacare? Remember at the start of this, HillaryCare? When will they let us control our own care? What will they do to stop causing our pain and start feeling it again?

Well, in other words, um, is Hillary a new Democrat or an old one?

Now, the press asks, the press asks, can anyone stop Hillary? Again this is to forgo a conclusion, right: It's to scare us off and convince us that a pantsuit can crush patriots? Okay, that's what this is all about.

Hey, Iowa – can anyone stop Hillary? Yeah, and let's borrow a phrase – Yes, we can! And it starts here and it starts now.

From bad, comes good. That's be one of my mantras – from very bad can come very good. So employ that as we look back on history. The last time that we suffered under such an out-of-touch presidency, well we were lifted out our malaise by a charismatic, positive, solution-oriented conservative who so loved this country and he put his faith in her people. We can't have the Gipper back. But we can offer that steady, smart, stiff-spine leadership that Reagan did, and that's our challenge.

To paraphrase the Great Communicator – to give the people real hope, well, now is the time for bold, conservative colors, not establishment pale pastels. We need to ask who carries on Reagan's legacy? Who will lead our freedom movement to victory, to begin that fundamental restoration of America? You answer that, Iowa, by making the GOP primary a competition, not a coronation.

Our party is at a crossroads, and many voters – oh shoot, some in my own family, even – they've lost faith in the GOP machine, and their registering as independents, so many voters across the country – independent. They're looking for principle and patriotism over political party. And the good news is, though, in our party, our bench is deep. And considering some in the lineup, man, it's a good thing. It is good that we have a deep bench. And it's primary competition that will surface the candidate who's up to the test and can unify. And this person has to, because knowing what the media will do all throughout 2016 to all of us, it's gonna take more than a village to beat Hillary.

Well okay and  here's how we do it, okay. We go on offense. We go on offense now and we expect our GOP leaders in DC to get on offense, because we the people, we realize this is war. As I say, it is war for the solvency, the sovereignty of the United States of America. And we don't sit on our thumbs this next time when one of our own is being crucified and falsely accused of whatever the hip accusation of the day happens to be, right? Racism, sexism, whatever. Really it's kinda Orwellian, observing how that works, that rule of Saul Alinsky's no doubt, that the left employs.

Digusting charges from the left. Reverse 'em. You know, for it is they who point a finger, not realizing they have triple that amount of fingers pointing right back 'em, revealing that they are the ones who really discriminate and divide on color and class and sex. We call them out. We don't let them get away with it then.

On gender, especially…oh man, this one…on gender – it is they who defeat women. They shackle them to the good ole boys running Washington, pimping this promise that, oh, they have to provide for the little lady's every need because, there there, a woman, she's just not capable. It's the left that does that. It isn't the right, it isn't conservatives.

So we go on offense, and we reveal the real War on Women with truth, because we can handle the truth. We give that, then we give hope. We give hope and we give a real choice. We walk it, we don't talk it by proving to voters what works. We do that by only supporting those who've actually done the job, who've gut government, incentivized the private sector and never compromised on freedom.

And proof that that works? Look at the conservative governors. They're accountable. They administer. They have these results all across the US in conservative governors offices. The results can be argued.

So we paint the contrast with bold colors and we don't underestimate the wisdom of the people when we, on offense, give them the truth and the true state of the union, especially showing young people what's actually going on and teaching young people again, there ain't no such thing as a free lunch. There is no free college. There is no free birth control. There is no free phone. Someone pays. Someone always pays.

So we undo do that leftist thinking and teaching, that enabling. We counter it with reality and we empower young kids again. We bring them on our side and we make them know – to get a buck, you get off your butt. We teach that again.

And we get honest on national security. We give hope to the people that we need not, we will not succumb to evil and we call it as it is. We address it. That must be, by the way, that 800-pound elephant in the room of the White House that the radical left won't even a name. They won't even name the threat to our way of life today. We'll hit it. We'll name it. It is any Muslim who would choose evil, whose loyalty to a dealth-cult perversion has so darkened and deceived his sole that

they actually think that they're welcome here, to transform here? No! What we do, we strengthen our military, we respect our troops, and we let them – our troops, as our gatekeepers – we let them tell jihadists, uh-uh, is our house, get the hell out.

And amnesty. Man we gotta…we have to be candid and the people deserve the candidness because because that leads to solutions, they deserve solutions. Amnesty – no. The left, and the RINOs, they would reward those whose first action here is to break the law. So, no, we win with the wonderful immigrants who have built this country legally and we secure their rights and their hard-fought opportunities. Together we shore up the deserving middle class that will be decimated under this unconstitutional executive amnesty.

We also have to school our president, I guess, on the rules. An impatient president doesn't just get to trample our Constitution and ignore Congress just because he doesn't get exactly what he wants every time he wants it. It’s, umm, with all due respect to the office of the presidency, it's like, it's like an overgrown little boy whose just acting kinda spoiled and moms…we don't put up with that, do we? No. Well, dads either, but eh ah….

In fact, this reminds me of Bristol. When she was a little girl in preschool – she can testify to this – she came home from preschool one day – and her cool teacher, her awesome teacher, beautiful, sharp woman whose family had come from Mexico years ago – and Bristol said, "Mom, Mrs. Huey's mommy and daddy, they are so happy that they got to come to America and she (the daughter) she became a teacher. They're so happy and they love this country so much that they named her after our country. My teacher's first name is "Land." And I thought, Land? Oh, poor guy. I mean that's something a Palin kid would have to suffer through the rest of their life, whoa, ooh. But no, Bristol hadn't gotten it quite right. The teacher's real name was America. The parents had, the parents had named her America. And so I was explaining that to Bristol – "It's not Land or Globe – it's America." And, um, Mrs. Huey taught Bristol, all my kids, all of us a lesson that our president must have missed. When her students would whine about something, not getting their way exactly as they wanted it in that preschool class, she would sing this little mantra. America said, "Ya what ya get and you don't throw a fit." That is what our president must have missed growing up, because this insistence, this lawlessness of he trying to get his way – it tramples our Constitution.

So, from debt – and I won't even get into all the details of everything – but from debt…. You know, normal people, when they're a hole they don't wanna be in, the first thing they do is stop digging. I don't know what is wrong with the leaders in this country who understand we are in a hole we don't want to be in and they keep digging. But from debt to energy. Proving that inherent link between American-made energy and prosperity and American-made energy and security to solutions like the flat tax that we need to stop this unhealthy new obsession that we're hearing about even on our side of the aisle with this subjective income gap that we're supposed to be so obsessed with right now. When, no – we don't have to be obsessed with it. Not when everyone rises together. With conservative's proven free-market principles that incentivize pursuing capital and investment and innovation so it results in lasting prosperity for everyone.

And to finally stop this overreaching bureaucracy. We got on offense and we drive in solutions and we be bold. I remember it was, it was here in Iowa that I put forward in a speech some years ago that…I guess I can listen to me cuz they didn't do anything about it…but here, I said, why don't we decentralize the federal government? We have to be bold about this stuff. Shtter out-of-touch bureaucracy and move what's remaining across the country to the people. If there is to be a Department of Energy, put it where the energy is created. Pack up the U-Haul. What better place for the Department of Agriculture than in ag country, so they see how their policies affect the farmers and ranchers who feed our country?

Things like that – it must change. Things must change for this cover…. Our government, look at it. It, isn't too big to fail – it's too big to succeed. It's too big to succeed so we can afford no retreads or nothing will change. With the same people and same policies that got us into this status quo…. Another Latin word, status quo, and it stands for man, the middle-class, everyday Americans are really gettin' taken for a ride. That's status quo, and GOP leaders, by the way….

You know, "The Man" can only ride ya when your back is bent. So strengthen it. Then The Man can't ride you. America won't be taken for a ride because so much is at stake and we can't afford politicians playing games like nothing more is at stake than, oh, maybe just the next standing of theirs in the next election.

And we're not in the mood to give politicians a pass just because they happen to have a certain party initial, right next to their name. Evidence of this, that it's not just us thinking this but across the country. Look at the number of governors elected without a majority of the vote. That is the result of fired-up, independent and strong third party candidates nowadays. In fact it's at its highest level in the last 100 years. Alaska just elected a very strong conservative who formed an independent ticket. In order to prove this, he'd be beholden to the people – not too obsessive party politics that  result in the titles, in the hierarchies and all the problems that come with that.

Being beholden to the people…. It is, it is their record, then, not their standing in the party but their record that needs to be considered, and we cut them then if we want a fired-up, unified based to get the GOP over the line to thwart the lies of the left and their politics of personal destruction. We gotta cut the candidates who don't fit that bill of being beholden to the people. You see, we'll vote for those who have a record to prove it, and voters of all stripes are desiring something to vote for this time. For their American Dream, not just against tired, failed policies. We, they will vote for American Dream for their kids and their grandkids.

So we have to be careful going through the primary process not to marginalize any independent, common-sense conservative. Hey, let's also take the sign off the door to the Oval Office, you know that one that said for a while, "No girls allowed." Take that off the wall, okay.

And, we remember, but Margaret Thatcher would always remind her constituents, anyway, that if you want something said, you ask a man. If you want something done, you ask a woman. And America is ready to get stuff done.

So we take the ball and we drive to victory, and we give real hope with real solutions, grounded in time-tested truths. These solutions that will be brought to you by a competitor with the record to prove it. And then – we're ready for Hillary.

Now, I'm ready for Hillary. Are you? Are you comin'?

It was a few summers ago…my final thought here…. A few summers ago after a great day with friends and farmers and farm animals at your Iowa State Fair, that we loaded up the motorhome and we drove some hours over the border to Illinois and we stopped along the way because my daughter Piper, she had never got to run through a maze in a corn field. So little simple things like that – that shows you how exciting my life is, eh, that was like the highlight, highlight of our trip – so Piper and her little cousin, they get to run through this maze for the very first time, and it really is like this all-Americana thrill for our family and then driving through the small towns around here that glorify our nation, again with those homes probably waving the flag from the porch, and we pulled into Dixon as we cross that state line, we pulled into Dixon, Illinois, and we turned on Hennepin Street.

We stopped at a modest, white, clapboard home, and it had a pair of rocking chairs out on the front porch and a neighbor came over and told us about the house, and he told us about the little boy who used to live in that house, and that his family couldn't afford the house, to own it, so they rented it. Well, the little boy had a little, tiny bedroom of the front of the house and that's where he would listen to the radio and he'd get his news and he'd learn from that and his entertainment, and he played football in the front yard and ride his bike up and down the sidewalks, and you know – just real life. And then as a teen, he was there working as a lifeguard there on the Rock River, where he saved 77 souls. And he grew up then, to save a world from communism and he inspired a nation to once again believe in itself. This little boy from humble beginnings that wasn't that far here was, of course, Ronald Reagan, and he never forgot where he came from, those roots in the Heartland.

And his story is our story. It embodies the American Dream. It's a dream that we all must be willing to sacrifice for and to fight for today, now more than ever, together, dreaming that, living it, working for it. We can make sure that the dream lives and that we know that our best days are still ahead. And I have every confidence that when we, when conservatives rise to that challenge and offer a real choice, we will have a rebirth of successful conservative leadership like Reagan gave us. And the American people will once again be inspired and be united as proud, secure citizens of the greatest nation in the history of the world.

And I thank you, Iowa, for being a center of that. I say, God bless you, Iowa. God bless the United States of America. Thank you.


Thank you so much. And to Millie and all of her good work at the NRA—as a lifetime member of the NRA, I so appreciate your efforts—they are protecting our Second Amendment rights. Thank you, Millie. She’s not just a Mama Grizzly—she’s a Mama Grizzly who’s probably packin’—so don’t mess with Millie.

Truly, I thank you so much, and I am honored to get to be here. The last time I was in D.C., my family and I were here cruising on Harley Davidsons with Rolling Thunder, which is the rally—the rally—to honor America’s finest, our United States military, our veterans of war. Nothing says America louder or prouder than chopped Harley hogs driven by our heroes, those vets. Now, when we were here last, my husband, Todd, he was able to drive one of those 400,000 machines that day. He traded in the bike, though, for a snow machine this week. He’s back home gearing up for his 2000-mile race across Alaska, the Iron Dog, so he couldn’t make this trip. My girls are here, though. They were with me at Rolling Thunder. Bristol and Willow are here with me, somewhere, today, out here. Glad they’re with us.

Do you know why Rolling Thunder chose Washington for their rally? They wanted to make their engines their voice. They wanted to rev them at the seat of power, and that’s exactly why CPAC started back in the 1970’s. Conservatives wanted, not so much government, but the Republican Party to hear us. At the 1975 CPAC, Ronald Reagan, he laid out a blueprint for rebuilding the GOP under a banner of bold colors, not pale pastels. And ever since then, CPAC has been the rally for conservative action, and that’s why I’m glad to be here today with all of you conservative activists. 

Now today the conservative movement has never been stronger or brighter with people at the grass roots. And yet, the federal government has never cast a bigger shadow. So for the last three years, we’ve been waving a bold banner that shouts, “Don’t tread on me.” See, the Tea Party rose up because Americans woke up. And our movement—it is bigger than one person. It is bigger than one candidate. It is bigger than one party. It’s about one country united under God.

We’re not red Americans, we’re not blue Americans—we’re red, white and blue, and President Obama, we are through with you. We paid for three years of his administration, and we cannot afford four more.

Candidate Obama: he promised to fundamentally transform America—and that’s one promise that he has kept. Transforming a shining city on a hill into a sinking ship. Promising to cut the deficits in half—and instead, he’s piled on trillions more in debt, trillions more—$135,000 per taxpayer just in this new debt, $3 million more a minute—and no plan to stop it. No plan. No budget. Going on a thousand-some odd days, and still no budget. He mucked it up.

Folks, this government isn’t too big to fail, it’s too big to succeed. It’s too big to ignore, and it’s too big to bear any more.

Now what did we get in return for the president’s spending spree? About 8 ½ percent unemployment and 13 million Americans can’t find work. Forty-six million living in poverty. Now, government dependency under Obama has gone up 23%, and for the first time in our history, folks are fearing that our future is going to be worse that our past. Look around—you can see some decline. You can see failure—but it is not the failure of the American people. It is not a failure of American itself. It is the failure of our leadership.

But we know how to change that! Oh, yes we do. Oh, yes we can. Hope and change. Yeah, you gotta hope things change. It’s change that we can believe in, change that we need, it’s the change I want to talk about today. Because—to borrow another phrase from our president—we can’t wait. Our country hangs in the balance. 

See—ya just won. See how easy that is?

We can’t wait. We must come together as constitutional conservatives to save our republic. America has reached her tipping point. The door is open, though, folks. Declare it! The door is open. Now, if they keep trying to tax and take and spend our way to prosperity, we know where we’ll end up. Just look to the Old World to see the New World’s future. It’s a future of downsizing and downturns and downgrades. Now that’s the future of the far left’s dream—that’s not the American Dream and, so help me God, it’s not a future we will ever accept.

But President Obama has a different view, it’s kind of this conflict-of-visions thing. When I listened to his State of the Union last month, I was really struck that he barely mentioned unemployment and entitlements. What did he talk about? He gave us more promises—promises to give us “an economy built to last.” Well Mr. President, we don’t want an economy built to last. We want an economy built to grow, and we certainly don’t want your economy built to last. We want your administration to end.

It’s amazing. In the history of our republic, never has there been such a gaping disconnect between how our own president sees the state of the union and how the Americans he is to serves sees the state of union. He actually believes that we are headed in the right direction, even though seven in ten Americans—those with their boots on the ground and their nose to the grindstone—no, they’re saying, no, we’re headed in the absolute wrong direction. We believe real recovery can’t get underway until government gets out of the way.

The president wants to raise taxes so he can redistribute wealth. We want to cut taxes so that we can create more wealth. Government digging us deeper and deeper into debt—it’s not because it taxes too little, it’s because it spends too much. We know to deal with that debt. You cut it, gut it, get rid of it. Americans shouldn’t have to spend their lives working so hard so Washington can spend easy.

He says that he has a job plan now—a jobs plan to “win the future.” WTF—I know. And I’m the idiot. Yeah. His WTF plan. Well, he’ll invest your money in bullet trains to nowhere but would stop Boeing from building planes anywhere. Bankrupt green energy companies get sweet loans and grant offers, but oil pipelines: not allowed to give you job offers.

We say his plan isn’t winning the future, it is losing our country. We have a better jobs plan and it’s called the free market. It worked before this president and it will work again after this president.

He says that we need more of his financial regulations. We say, go ask MF Global customers how happy they are with his regulatory agencies. Where were they when Jon Corzine lost $1.2 billion of customer funds? Remember, his Washington regulatory wizards, they didn’t prevent the financial meltdown. These folks have helped cause it, and you had to bail ‘em out.

The president says—small Americans, small town Americans—we bitterly cling to our religion and our guns because we are just doggone frustrated with his pace of change. You say, I say, we say—keep your change, we’ll keep our God, our guns, our Constitution.

See, Professor Obama may have forgotten the Bill of Rights. But we shall not forsake it, including those rights that our founders risked their lives for: the freedom of religion, our right to bear arms. We will rise up. We will defend them.

The president believes that your tax dollars should subsidize, oh, Planned Parenthood. We believe that every child is created equal with that right to life, and I ask you to stand up for those who cannot stand for themselves. If not us, then who?

The President believes that we need to consolidate power, centralize power—big power—in Washington, because you just can’t be trusted to make decisions for yourself. Not about your health insurance, not about your gas mileage, not even about your light bulbs. We believe that it’s time to return power to the people, that’s where the founders intended it. That’s where the Constitution entrusts it. And that is where it belongs again today, people.

Now perhaps this distrust of us is because he seems to believe that America is a destructive force in the world. That we should apologize to enemies. He believes that we should our missile defense technology with the Kremlin. He believes we should make deep cuts in our military while other nations are building up their militaries. Deep cuts to our troops while we keep on spending wildly on everything else. Talk about priorities.

Today, the White House is actually trying to negotiate with the Taliban while at the same time they’re watching helplessly while Iran moves perilously close to developing their nukes and the ICBMs to deliver them. We say, our number one Constitutional duty that belongs to the commander in chief, is protecting the American people and this great land and our allies. God Bless Israel.

Our president needs to understand that—he need to understand what you understand, that is what America’s brave fighting sons and daughters are asked to risk their lives for every day. If only he would understand that. This isn’t some kind of international community organizing we’re talking about or social welfare networking that’s going on. No, we will never apologize for America’s strength and our greatness, and we will refuse to accept that a weak America means a better and safer world.

We are going to put our confidence in the strength our Armed Forces, not in the hollow promises of our adversaries, and not the cleverness of our diplomats and our bureaucrats. As generations before us, they, like we now, will gladly, proudly fight to defend this land of the free. We must be home of the brave.

One reason our president, I believe, has such a skewed view is, here tucked inside Washington, he doesn’t get out to see much of real America. Now 11 months from now, he’ll have his chance to spend his time outside of D.C.—all of it. When he comes down from his lofty office, and he is finished rolling back the tides, and lowering the sea levels, or snow drifts or avalanches—whatever all those promises were, when he’s finished with all of that, well, then he’s going to see that the facts on the ground are much different. The divide between Washington and the rest of the country—it has never been greater and it has never been more dangerous. While America struggles, Washington prospers, and while our real estate markets crash, Washington’s is strong.

We have suffered massive job losses out there. Washington is hiring, but the question is, they are hiring for what? They don’t manufacture. They don’t mine. They don’t drill. They don’t harvest. They produce nothing, and the services that they provide—they increase dependency, not freedom. They don’t create wealth. They take it. This is Obama’s Washington. It’s not the Washington of our founders but the Washington of the permanent political class. It is something that our forefathers never envisioned and they would have sworn their lives, their fortunes, their sacred honor to change.

This Washington, it borders the ten wealthiest counties in America. It’s now home to the highest per-capita income. Here, millionaires are minted overnight. Heck, they even have a Lamborghini dealership here. Not that there’s anything wrong with hot wheels, but this is the playground for the government rich and they are hoping that you all work really, really hard to keep ‘er goin’.

Though the people—the people—need and demand urgent reform from this growing, out-of-touch government, it’s for freedom’s sake and it’s to grow our small businesses and hire more people. Though we know that things must change rapidly in order to let the private sector grow, friends, there is no such sense of urgency here in Obama’s Washington, because life around here is really good, materially. Our permanent political class is content. They’re immune to the realities that the rest of us face. See, they exempt themselves. They play by a different set of rules.

Look at, say, their EPA. It’s imperiling private industry. It’s imperiling our energy independence, the steps we need to take to be secure. It’s enslaving us, really, to these foreign, dangerous supplies of energy instead of tapping into our own God-given sources energy, here under foot. That’s what the EPA is all about right now. You have to ask yourself, when was the last time you saw the EPA prevent constructing, say, a new government building? Maybe instead of calling Washington a swamp, we should call it a wetlands. Maybe that’ll slow down the growth of government.

The old Washington of our founders, it was a place where you came to serve your government, not prosper over it, and on it and off of it. No, you left your home, you left your farm, you left your industry behind to serve the common good.

But this Washington is a place where politicians, they arrive as men and women of modest means and they become plutocrats. The money-making opportunities for D.C. politicians are really endless, but they don’t just enrich themselves off of you, for themselves, they spread the wealth around to their pals, and this has a name: it’s called crony capitalism.

I said in a speech in American’s Breadbasket over the summer, this isn’t the capitalism of free men and free markets, of risk and sacrifice, of innovation and hard work. No, it’s the capitalism of connections, and of government bailouts and handouts and waste, and corporate welfare and corruption. This is the capitalism of Barack Obama and the permanent political class.

It’s why I say to the Occupy protesters, you are occupying the wrong place. You are protesting the wrong thing. This crony capitalism is a root of our economic problems. It has spurred the expansion of government, which diminishes, of course, freedom and opportunity for all to rise and to succeed. See, some politicians get elected just by promising more programs, and new freebies and new favors, and then government grows to accommodate their promises. It never shrinks, and that crowds out the liberating, individual initiative and the equal opportunity that America was built upon. It swallows up the work ethic that we try to teach our children and it extinguishes that independent, pioneering American spirit.

Now often they come to D.C. denouncing the place as the cesspool of corruption, but after a year or two, they decide, ehhh, it’s not cesspool—more like a hot tub. And they are hoppin’ in and enjoyin’ the jacuzzi.

Well, America, it is time we drain the jacuzzi and throw the bums out with the bath water. We took a good first step in 2010, as much as the media wants you to forget that election, Tea Party patriots won an historic victory. We the people rose up and we spoke up, and our message was, we don’t want the left’s big government agenda. We can’t afford it and we won’t pay for it.

Now these points I want to make about Congress, I want to be clear. I toast the Tea Party members there in Congress. Many of them who have fought so bravely against the status quo and they agreed with us that you can’t get out of debt by digging deeper into debt—some even voted against giving the president another plastic card that we expect our kids and grandkids to have to pay off for us. Barack Obama has fought these folks every step of the way. He has dismissed them. He has lied about them. They have held their ground. They have kept their promises to the people who hired them, and now they need reinforcements. Will you help them?

This November we are going to take back the Senate and we are going to fortify the House. Be aware, Washington, Tea Party patriots are alive and well, we’ll elect more, and this time, establishment, we expect them to get leadership posts in Congress.

But to fix Obama’s Washington, to return power to the people, we must replace Obama at the ballot box. He is sinking our ship of state. When a ship is going down, the last thing you need is a community organizer just re-organizing the deck chairs while singing “Let’s Stay Together.” We should not forget, that for all of his lofty rhetoric and all of his song, you know, President Obama is a Chicago politician, where graft, cronyism, quid pro quo—that’s the Chicago way. I came from a state with a corruption problem, too. The difference is—though you don’t make many friends in the establishment doing it—I fought the corrupt political machine. Barack Obama, though—he used it. He used it to advance. He never challenged it. He never changed it. He brought it here with him.

And now in the campaign—oh, he’ll try to re-invent himself now as the champion of the working man, like Carhartts and Steel-toed Boots-Are-Us. Well, sorry, but no. He’s the champion of the power players who will bankroll his billion-dollar campaign. Lord only know how many more Solyndra’s are out there that he had promised them to repay their investment in him. We can’t afford to find out.

Now friends, we don’t know who our nominee will be to come up against Barack Obama and his failed policies in the fall. We don’t know who our nominee will be. But we know that this election will be hard-fought. Our nominee must be ready, strong, fortified, passionate, a fighter for American ideals. Our candidate must be someone who can instinctively turn right, to constitutional conservative principles. It’s too late in the game to teach it or to spin it at this point. It’s either there or it isn’t.

So listen—all of these challenges facing America, all these questions…. Our candidates, you know, they’re trying to articulate the right answer through oftentimes a foggy filter of a biased media and through maybe bullying campaign expert advisors who, they themselves, you know, are not willing or able to run for dog catcher, but they’ll tell these candidates what they should say.

Well, you gotta remember—a candidate’s true intentions, their real answers, they can be found in that candidate’s view of government itself. My view comes directly from the most brilliant blueprints crafted for us, it seems providentially that they were crafted back then for us today—our Charters of Liberty. They assert that all political power is inherent in the people. Government originates with the people’s ideas. It’s founded on their will only, and it is instituted solely for the good of the people. Now he who inherently believes that—that’s who I’m looking for. That’s who we’re looking for in our nominee.

And we’re hearing now—we’ve all heard from these experts that—ugh!—we gotta name our nominee right now. Gotta wrap it up—no debate for you. Cut it off—we’re through. As if competition weakens our nominee. And yet in America, we believe that competition strengthens us. Competition elevates our game. Competition will lead us to victory in 2012.

We must stay true to our principles. I believe that the competition has gotta keep going. But let’s make sure this competition brings out the best in our party.

We know that the far left and their media allies can’t beat us on the issues, so instead, they’ll distort our records. They’ll smear our reputations. They’ll even attack our families. Let’s not do the job for them, okay Republicans? Okay Independents?

In 2008, we saw that, man, opponents stop at nothing to destroy our party’s ticket. And after the race, attempts to destroy would continue. We can’t let the next ticket go through that. We can’t le them divide us. Together we must stand, as conservatives with common sense, with a servant’s heart, for the good of our party. But more importantly, for the sake of our country we must stand united, whoever our nominee is. Whoever our nominee is, we must work together to get him over the finish line, so he can start tackling this defense of our republic.

And then next year at this time, this time next year, we will have a true conservative in the Oval Office. And next year, may he be here, one of us, speaking to us at CPAC. We will have a president who defends our American way of life instead of apologizing for it. We will have a commander in chief worthy of our troops.

Our troops, those in uniform, who are serving something greater than self, sacrificing much around a dangerous world so that we here at home can enjoy the blessings of liberty. They represent the best of America. In their honor, please know that we are so blessed to live in the greatest nation ever known. Don’t squander this.

Remember Ronald Reagan’s inaugural address. He acknowledged in that that we’ve been set aside in a very special way, so we mustn’t stray from our noble beginning. He reminded us that we be a free people living under the law with faith in our Maker and our future. He implored us to not stray from our conviction. That standards of right and wrong do exist and they must be lived up to. Friends, we are the heirs of patriots who cast off the chains of tyranny, of immigrants who braved the seas, of pioneers who pushed into the great unknown, of soldiers who stormed foreign shores, of farmers and workers laboring in fields and in factories from dusk until dawn—they toiled so that their children would have a better life.

That is America, and that is freedom, and that is why we are exceptional.

As President Obama lacks the vision to lead, we will lead. The door is open. Our vision is as bold and strong and free as the country that we love. It’s a vision of government that works for us, not against us. It’s a vision that is rooted in the old Washington of our founders, not the Washington of today’s permanent political class. It is a vision of reward for hard work and personal responsibility, of liberty, and of empowerment. It’s a vision that our heroes throughout history proved through liberating strife their selfless love of country. It is the enduring vision of this land which God has shed His grace upon. We will cherish it. We will preserve it. We will fight for it.

The door is open.

God bless you, patriots. And God bless the United States of America.


Thank you so much, Jake.

I think Paul Ryan is soon to be Cantored, as in Eric Cantor. His political career is over, but for a miracle, because he has so

disrespected the will of the people. And, yes, as the leader of the GOP, the convention certainly, he is to remain neutral. And for him to already come out and say who he will not support was not a wise decision of his.

You know, I think why Paul Ryan is doing this, Jake, is, it kind of screws his chances for the 2020 presidential bid that he's gunning for. If the GOP were to win now, that wouldn't bode well for his chances in 2020, and that's what he's shooting for.

So, lot of people, with their never Trump or not right now Trump mantra going on, they have their different reasons. I think that one is Paul Ryan's reason.

Well, that's a good question, seeing as I haven't even got to call him and tell him that I'm supporting him.

But, yes, I will do whatever I can for Paul Nehlen. This man is a hardworking guy, so in touch with the people. Paul Ryan and his ilk, their problem is they have become so disconnected from the people whom they are elected to represent, as evidenced by Paul Ryan's refusal to support the GOP front-runner that we just said he's our man.

And what Paul Ryan and his ilk, again, their problem is, they're -- they feel so threatened at this point that their power, their prestige, their purse will be adversely affected by the change that is coming with Trump, and with someone like Paul Nehlen that they're not thinking straight right now.

And, no, those concerns are -- relatively speaking, Jake, they're superficial, talking about tone and certain verbiage that is chosen over what perhaps Paul Ryan or somebody would have chosen to articulate. Who cares?

We care -- the people of America care about getting things done finally, taking our government back and putting it on our side. It's all about we the people. And we're rising up, fed up with people who have screwed the American people by breaking their campaign promises.

We worked so hard to get Paul Ryan back in there, and so many other -- quote, unquote -- "conservatives," and look what they have done.

Well, you know, I think a lot of people may be obsessed with a public figure's personal life, and they're going to get all entangled in, you know, past indiscretions or whatever.

But I think, for the most part, Americans are concerned about things like who will be able to appoint the next Supreme Court justices, which will affect an entire generation coming up. I think that's what people are concerned about, much more so than Bill Clinton's obvious indiscretions, and Donald Trump having been divorced a couple of times, but owning up to it.

Things like that, at least for people like me, eh, I just think that's like the least of our worries right now.

I think I'm pretty much as vetted as anybody in the country could be vetted already.

So, I think there are so many other great people out there in America who can serve in this position. I think, if someone wanted to choose me, they already know who I am, what I stand for. They wouldn't be in for any surprises.

I don't want to be a burden on the ticket, and I recognize that, in many, many eyes, I would be that burden. So, you know, I just -- I just want the guy to win. I want America to win, and I don't know if I would be the person that would be able to help him win, Jake.

As a very prominent female supporter of Donald Trump, do you wince when he says things like that?

Heck no. I'm like, Trump, you know, you're saying what a lot of other people are thinking. He just happens to be the most candid about it in a public arena than most Americans are used to.

So, no, I don't wince. And I know the man. And I have known him for years. And I so appreciate that he has great respect for women. He listens to the sharp, confident women in his life, his -- his wife, his daughter, those who surround him in business. He listens to even, you know, Joe-Bo hockey mom from Wasilla, if I have an idea that would perhaps make sense with his conservative agenda.

No, I know the man, and I respect him because he respects women.

I give a lot more credit to Latino voters than perhaps the mainstream media would, in just assuming that they have kind of a herd mentality and are all going to go to one candidate over another.

Latinos, for the most part, hardworking, independent people who just want -- they want to be able to have a good job. Those who are here legally and will follow the rules that America has set forth, they want to work hard and provide for their family.

I sure wish that politicians wouldn't worry about these racial divides that are for the most part made up by those who thrive on division and contention, and instead politicians worry about perhaps what their record has said about themselves.

Well, John McCain and I, we have gone through a lot of battles, separately and together. And I really respect the man.

And I think that he doesn't have any more to worry about with Latinos than perhaps he would have to be concerned with in terms of explaining his record to the general populace there in Arizona.

But I don't live in Arizona, so I haven't paid as close to attention as everybody there has, of course.
I don't want the platform to change, no.

That culture of life that will be built upon the pro-life views that the majority of conservatives and Republicans hold, I respect that. I -- there's -- I don't think that there's a need for that to change. But, when it comes to abortion, it's very sensitive. It's very -- it's such a personal issue. I think that the plank in the platform is the way it should be. And I respect and support and want it to stay that way.

And when we can conclude that the plank of the platform is fine as is, then we can start talking about what people are really concerned about in this nation, concerned about in this election. And that is, as I have said, debt, open borders, illegal immigrants coming on over and receiving freebies left and right, instead of our own people, especially our vets, being able to receive the benefits that they have earned, growing government, that intrusion that the failed liberal agenda so perpetuates.

That's what people want to talk about. 

at we have no leadership in D.C. to stop the D.C. insanity. So Iowa, are you ready to fix the problem? You are gonna be leading the nation tonight, it’s you! The eyes of America are upon you, you’ll lead the nation in this. You know why Barack Obama really trashed our constitution and just ran roughshod right on over Congress and rammed those executive orders down our throat? You know why he did that? Because he could. He knew that he could.
You are a part of this great awakening that is so needed, and it’s a movement, and it’s an energy, and it’s a strategy.

This, though, this great awakening that you are all a part of, is telling those in D.C., those good ole’ boys, that we’re not gonna take it anymore, that enough is enough. You are part of this great awakening that is so needed, and it’s a movement, and it’s an energy, and it’s a strategy. It’s a strategy where we all know, we know that it’s now or never to make America great again, that’s how important this election is. It is now or never. And this campaign was borne of that urgency. And really, it is all about you. You who grow our food and teach our children, you who run our main streets and run our factories, own the businesses, you who fight our wars, you know that we are at a tipping point.

It’s so funny though that the beltway pundits, so many in the media, they don’t know that, though. They won’t admit it anyway. They’re still saying, “Dang, I can’t figure out this Trump thing! Where’s all this energy coming from?” And I say, “Daaang, what’s not to figure out?” We love our country, and we’ll fight for it! We love our freedom and we’ll fight for it! A lot of us here, we proudly cling to our god, our guns, and our constitution, and those who don’t, they still want to be with us to fight for it, our rights, to exercise that, that is why we are here as a part of this movement. Those who maybe don’t believe in those specific values and things that, listed there, they still want to fight with us so we can save the freest, most generous, most exceptional nation in the history of mankind! So what is not to get? We’re clear, we’re here, get used to it!
They’re still saying, “Dang, I can’t figure out this Trump thing! Where’s all this energy coming from?” And I say, “Daaang, what’s not to figure out?”

We need to send a message tonight, Iowa. We need to be able to count on you leading the charge for the rest of the nation. We’re rootin’ for Donald Trump, and you know why? Because Trump roots for us. He has worked so hard, and he has seized opportunity to earn his success, and he wants that great success for the rest of us too. And he’s using it to help his fellow man, he wants that for all of you. He is beholden to no one but we the people. And he is beholden to nothing except doing the right thing, to restore constitutional government back into the system, that’s the only way we save our Republic. So you’re here for the right reasons, he’s in it to win it, he’s runnin’ for the right reasons, I thank you from the bottom of my heart for speaking on behalf of so many millions of millions of Americans tonight when you go to caucus and you cast that vote for Trump. He wants that success, he wants the best for all of you. So to make America great again, let me introduce to you the next president of the United States of America, Donald J. Trump
